The chains, which I'm no fan of, beat this place easily.	0
I don't have very many words to say about this place, but it does everything pretty well.	1
The staff is super nice and very quick even with the crazy crowds of the downtown juries, lawyers, and court staff.	1
When I received my Pita it was huge it did have a lot of meat in it so thumbs up there.	1
Paying $7.85 for a hot dog and fries that looks like it came out of a kid's meal at the Wienerschnitzel is not my idea of a good meal.	0
My brother in law who works at the mall ate here same day, and guess what he was sick all night too.	0
So good I am going to have to review this place twice - once hereas a tribute to the place and once as a tribute to an event held here last night.	1
The chips and salsa were really good, the salsa was very fresh.	1
Once you get inside you'll be impressed with the place.	1
Why are these sad little vegetables so overcooked?	0
I had high hopes for this place since the burgers are cooked over a charcoal grill, but unfortunately the taste fell flat, way flat.	0
I could eat their bruschetta all day it is devine.	1
Not a single employee came out to see if we were OK or even needed a water refill once they finally served us our food.	0
Lastly, the mozzarella sticks, they were the best thing we ordered.	1
The first time I ever came here I had an amazing experience, I still tell people how awesome the duck was.	1
The server was very negligent of our needs and made us feel very unwelcome... I would not suggest this place!	0
This place is overpriced, not consistent with their boba, and it really is OVERPRICED!	0
I can say that the desserts were yummy.	1
The seasonal fruit was fresh white peach puree.	1
It kept getting worse and worse so now I'm officially done.	0
But I definitely would not eat here again.	0
I love that they put their food in nice plastic containers as opposed to cramming it in little paper takeout boxes.	1
The crêpe was delicate and thin and moist.	1
For that price I can think of a few place I would have much rather gone.	0
I do love sushi, but I found Kabuki to be over-priced, over-hip and under-services.	0
Do yourself a favor and stay away from this dish.	0
No one at the table thought the food was above average or worth the wait that we had for it.	0
Best service and food ever, Maria our server was so good and friendly she made our day.	1
I paid the bill but did not tip because I felt the server did a terrible job.	0
Just had lunch here and had a great experience.	1
I have never had such bland food which surprised me considering the article we read focused so much on their spices and flavor.	0
Food is way overpriced and portions are fucking small.	0
I recently tried Caballero's and I have been back every week since!	1
for 40 bucks a head, i really expect better food.	0
The food came out at a good pace.	1
I ate there twice on my last visit, and especially enjoyed the salmon salad.	1
We could not believe how dirty the oysters were!	0
In fact I'm going to round up to 4 stars, just because she was so awesome.	1
To my disbelief, each dish qualified as the worst version of these foods I have ever tasted.	0
Bad day or not, I have a very low tolerance for rude customer service people, it is your job to be nice and polite, wash dishes otherwise!!	0
the potatoes were great and so was the biscuit.	1
So flavorful and has just the perfect amount of heat.	1
The price is reasonable and the service is great.	1
The Wife hated her meal (coconut shrimp), and our friends really did not enjoy their meals, either.	0
My fella got the huevos rancheros and they didn't look too appealing.	0
Went in for happy hour, great list of wines.	1
Some may say this buffet is pricey but I think you get what you pay for and this place you are getting quite a lot!	1
This place is pretty good, nice little vibe in the restaurant.	1
Talk about great customer service of course we will be back.	1
Hot dishes are not hot, cold dishes are close to room temp.I watched staff prepare food with BARE HANDS, no gloves.Everything is deep fried in oil.	0
They have a plethora of salads and sandwiches, and everything I've tried gets my seal of approval.	1
This place is awesome if you want something light and healthy during the summer.	1
For sushi on the Strip, this is the place to go.	1
The service was great, even the manager came and helped with our table.	1
The feel of the dining room was more college cooking course than high class dining and the service was slow at best.	0
I started this review with two stars, but I'm editing it to give it only one.	0
this is the worst sushi i have ever eat besides Costco's.	0
All in all an excellent restaurant highlighted by great service, a unique menu, and a beautiful setting.	1
My boyfriend and i sat at the bar and had a completely delightful experience.	1
I've had better bagels from the grocery store.	0
I love the owner/chef, his one authentic Japanese cool dude!	1
Now the burgers aren't as good, the pizza which used to be amazing is doughy and flavorless.	0
I found a six inch long piece of wire in my salsa.	0
I ordered Albondigas soup - which was just warm - and tasted like tomato soup with frozen meatballs.	0
On three different occasions I asked for well done or medium well, and all three times I got the bloodiest piece of meat on my plate.	0
I had about two bites and refused to eat anymore.	0
After 20 minutes wait, I got a table.	0
No allergy warnings on the menu, and the waitress had absolutely no clue as to which meals did or did not contain peanuts.	0
My boyfriend tried the Mediterranean Chicken Salad and fell in love.	1
Their rotating beers on tap is also a highlight of this place.	1
Pricing is a bit of a concern at Mellow Mushroom.	0
If you stay in Vegas you must get breakfast here at least once.	1
I want to first say our server was great and we had perfect service.	1
Highly unprofessional and rude to a loyal patron!	0
Their regular toasted bread was equally satisfying with the occasional pats of butter... Mmmm...!	1
The Buffet at Bellagio was far from what I anticipated.	0
Also, I feel like the chips are bought, not made in house.	0
After the disappointing dinner we went elsewhere for dessert.	0
The chips and sals a here is amazing!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!	1
This is my new fav Vegas buffet spot.	1
I seriously cannot believe that the owner has so many unexperienced employees that all are running around like chickens with their heads cut off.	0
i felt insulted and disrespected, how could you talk and judge another human being like that?	0
How can you call yourself a steakhouse if you can't properly cook a steak, I don't understand!	0
I'm not impressed with the concept or the food.	0
The only thing I wasn't too crazy about was their guacamole as I don't like it puréed.	0
There is really nothing for me at postinos, hope your experience is better	0
I got food poisoning here at the buffet.	0
They brought a fresh batch of fries and I was thinking yay something warm but no!	0
What SHOULD have been a hilarious, yummy Christmas Eve dinner to remember was the biggest fail of the entire trip for us.	0
Needless to say, I won't be going back anytime soon.	0
Every time I eat here, I see caring teamwork to a professional degree.	1
However, there was so much garlic in the fondue, it was barely edible.	0
I could barely stomach the meal, but didn't complain because it was a business lunch.	0
It was so bad, I had lost the heart to finish it.	0
It also took her forever to bring us the check when we asked for it.	0
We aren't ones to make a scene at restaurants but I just don't get it...definitely lost the love after this one!	0
The food is about on par with Denny's, which is to say, not good at all.	0
If you want to wait for mediocre food and downright terrible service, then this is the place for you.	0
WAAAAAAyyyyyyyyyy over rated is all I am saying.	0
The place was fairly clean but the food simply wasn't worth it.	0