Moroni to Anjouan. It is a very small airline. My ticket advised me to turn up at 0800hrs which I did. There was confusion at this small airport. I was then directed to the office of AB Aviation which was still closed. It opened at 0900hrs and I was told that the flight had been put back to 1300hrs and that they had tried to contact me. This could not be true as they did not have my phone number. I was with a local guide and he had not been informed either. I presume that I was bumped off. The later flight did operate but as usual, there was confusion at check-in. The flight was only 30mins and there were no further problems. Not a good airline but it is the only one for Comoros.	0
Anjouan to Dzaoudzi. A very small airline and the only airline based in Comoros. Check-in was disorganised because of locals with big packages and disinterested staff. The flight was fortunately short (30 mins). Took off on time and landed on time. With a short flight like there was of course no in-flight entertainment nor cabin service except for biscuits and a bottle of water, which was quite nice!	0
Holguin to Havana last week. Okay apart from issuing duplicate boarding cards to different passengers. Return was in a turbo prop plane which was 1 hour late and was infested by cockroaches running along the floor overhead lockers and electrical ducts. The plane was generally dirty. Obvious lack of maintenance.	0
What a wonderful friendly airline. Flew with them Hholguin to Havana and back. Both flights only minor delays was served juice and a cake on this short internal flight safety demonstration was done.	0
Please do a favor yourself and do not fly with Adria. On the route from Munich to Pristina in July 2019 they lost my luggage and for 10 days in a row, despite numerous phone calls they were not able to locate it. 11 days later the luggage arrived at the destination completely ruined. Applying for compensation, they ignored my request. Foolishly again, I booked another flight with them (345 euros) Frankfurt - Pristina in September 2019. They cancelled the flight with no reason 24 hours before the departure. Desperate phone calls to customer service to get anything (rerouting, compensation, etc) were not responded. I will never fly again with Adria. What a disgrace! Shame on you Adria for constantly deceiving your customers.	0
Do not book a flight with this airline! My friend and I should have returned from Sofia to Amsterdam on September 22 and 3 days before, they sent us an SMS informing the flight was cancelled. For 3 straight days we tried to reach the airline and the web agent (e-dreams) and we did not get a solution. Finally, 18 hours before our cancelled flight time, and after 35 minutes on a call (waiting), the airline was able to get us on a flight with Lufthansa. Do not book Adria Airways, it is unreliable and in our case, it ruined our last days of holidays since we needed to be on the phones all day.	0
Had very bad experience with rerouted and cancelled flights last weekend with Adria airways. Original Route was Ljubljana to Sarajevo return. Two weeks before i received an email that the flight was cancelled. Offered route change was Ljubljana to Sarajevo via Munich. Flight back changed to Sarajevo-Pristina-Ljubljana. I accepted. The first flight via Munich was ok. Two hours before the return flight I got the email that the flight was cancelled. I had to rebook via hotline and had to accept a flight with Croatian to Zagreb. I reached Ljubljana 4 h later and had to organize Transport from Zagreb to Ljubljana on my own cost. Do not book flights with Adria airways. I heard that their financial situation is very very bad.	0
Ljubljana to Zürich. Firstly, Ljubljana airport is terrible. Badly trained staff, unfriendly. Toilets are very dirty. Flight 2 hours delayed without any information. There is no Information desk so questions aren‘t possible. Never again will use this airline. Its even worse than the budget airlines and thats difficult.	0
First of all, I am not complaining about a specific flight. I am a Lufthansa frequent Flyer and I normally fly the route Munich - Timisoara. This summer season Lufthansa offered the flights on this route to Adria Airways, as they are a star alliance member. I can only tell that I have the worst experiences with them. In over 90% of the cases they are late, they don't fly on time. Always they offer the same excuse: they have no slot free. This is an unacceptable excuse, as all other companies flying on similar coridors seem not to have this problem. In addition, as LH Cityline was operating these flights I have almost never heard this excuse, or had this problem. I am flying on this route for 6 years already. They started also to cancel some flights. Maybe combine 2 flights into 1 to spare some money, who knows. The cabin crew is decent - not wow, not bad - but there also also situations when the staff are really rude and not customer oriented. I would recommend anyone to fly with this company. If you have the chance, book another company!	0
Worst Airline ever! They combined two flights to save costs. Instead of flying Pristina - Ljubliana - Zürich we now fly Pristina - Ljubliana - München - Zürich. Now we arrive 2.5h later at our destination.	0
Zurich to Ljubljana. Very poor customer service. Flight was cancelled without sending any email confirmation. The flight I was rebooked seemed to be overbooked at the beginning (which was not true)and we had to wait 30 min to have our ticket changed. Very bad experience overall.	0
Vienna to Sofia. The flight was delayed by 2 hours. The cabin crew was annoyed that they had to offer drinks to the passengers and passing by announced they would only give one drink per customer. And coffee was a nuisance and they made it clear, even though it was on their cart. The questions would normally go "would you drink anything?" and not "what would you like to drink?". Very bad customer service.	0
Ljubljana to Frankfurt. Flight delayed for more than 2 hours due to technical problems. We were not given any food or water and when I requested some I was told to complain to Adria Airways website. Another plane was organized, more than 2 hrs later. The staff was trying to convince the passengers that their connection to Singapore will wait (they had 15 min in between the new flight arrival time and departure!), and that the flight to Frankfurt is 1 hr - and no wifi connectivity on flight!	0
Guadalajara to Puerto Vallarta. Never again will I fly with this airline! The plane was so small and super hot inside. My seatbelt didn’t work as they are supposed too. Cabin staff just don’t care for customers! Just a horrible airline, never again will I use it.	0
Puerto Escondido to Mexico City. Aeromar is usually my airline of choice. On this day they were more than 2 hours late. So by the time I landed at Mexico City, got off the plane, got my luggage and got to the ticket counter of Aeromexico, my next flight was taking off towards Los Angeles. I thought that Aeromexico / Delta would just put me on the next flight. First, they made me visit different ticket counters which took another 45 minutes and at the end said that they couldn't do anything about it and I would have to buy a whole new ticket. The first ticket that I bought online cost me about $125 usd, but now this new ticket to LA cost me almost $300 usd. After I bought my ticket, went to the Aeromar ticket counter, which was in total disarray, and tried to talk with the supervisor. He gave me an email to write to and sent me on my way. Since then I wrote them twice and have received discouraging emails. Yesterday it took me two hours on the phone with them, going through 3 levels of management for them to give me a "courtesy flight" worth $80 usd and I still have to pay the tax. I ask them what would of happened if my whole family was with me, we would have spent $3,000 usd? He said that there is nothing that they could do, so much for customer service. So that is why I think I will never fly with them again.  In the old days we had no choice, but now there are 3 more airlines here in Puerto. There it is guys, the reason why I might never fly with Aeromar again.	0
Oaxaca to Mexico City . I have never experienced such bad customer service. People had been in line for over 2 hours. Only 1 desk agent. Instead of calling people up front for the flight that was going to depart he checked in people for the flight after. Then gave us boarding tickets when the plane was already gone. People waited for 2 hours to find out what to do next. This airline is a joke! We got booked on a flight the next morning resulting in a loss of paid hotel in Mexico city. When we arrived the next morning there were again 50 angry people in line waiting for a flight that Aeromar cancelled and didn't tell anyone. When we finally got on the plane multiple people had the same seat number. It was ridiculous and unprofessional.	0
I paid $365 for a direct flight from Oaxaca to Tuxtla Gutierrez in Mexico. This airlines baited and switched me by canceling the direct flight and they changed the ticket to Aeromexico with connecting flights and a longer trip that I can now by for $158. They would not refund the flight and i unfortunately booked it with Priceline (who has the worst customer service in the known universe), so I received no assistance whatsoever and options that were not properly explained to me. When I phoned Aeromar, I was greeted by a completely rude agent who was less than helpful. I would strongly advise against booking anything with this airlines.	0
Ixtapa Zihuatanejo to Acapulco via Mexico City. My 17-yr old daughter had the misfortune to come in contact with Aeromar and the lack of services while she was on route to Acapulco, on December 23, 2017. She had two connecting flights with Aeromar Airlinesone which was delayed and caused her to missed her final flight to Acapulco. The flight that was delayed was Flight 522. This flight from Ixtapa, to Mexico City was delayed fourty minutes and therefore, she arrived late to her gate to board flight 907, to her final destination, which was Acapulco. She was denied boarding, and there was no help from anyone from Aeromar, after whoch was not permitted to board. My 17-yr old, started her holidays stranded in a foreign country, in a busy airport and just left to her demise. I tried contacting the airline, no one answered, I contact which tried to get in touch with costumer service, and the booking agent, was not able as well. What is disgusting, is that not a single of the airline personnel working that night, offered to help, my daughter was just turned away and you did not care, specially, since it was the airline's fault in the first place that she missed her flight. My daughter had a panic attack, was afraid, and I had to sort all this out from Canada. To my misfortune, I had to buy, yet another ticket from Aeromar, for the next day, as well as find accommodations for the night. The travel agency which helped me book this trip, has made numerous attempts to resolve this, and nothing has been resolved yet.	0
Ixtapa-Zihuatanejo to Mexico City. Once more a delayed flight, just three hours but without any guarantee. Just "we hope that more or less at 4pm we will have a plane". Incompetent and unfriendly staff, truly the bad side of Mexico, just the image the country does not want to give. Everybody here gives you the impression that they want you out of their face and expect you to be thankful that there might be a flight after all. Which is not yet secured.	0
Madrid - Santa Cruz B747-400 economy. Checked in at Palma okay on connection but no through booking for seats. Check in at Madrid and Aerosur cabin luggage allowance less than originating airline (through ticket) so cabin bag removed and put in hold. Entering plane strong toilet odour throughout the cabin. Generally a very dirty cabin interior with hard uncomfortable seating. No inflight films available. Bar service once glass of wine and water. Cabin staff said they had run out. Dinner was a greasy stodgy rice. I've got my return to look forward to - and all for £1450.00 return. Awful - I do this trip 3 times a year and nobody else treats passengers like this.	0
Buenos Aires to Miami with a delay in the output of Buenos Aires 5hrs. After a scheduled stopover in Santa Cruz in Bolivia suffered a further delay of 4 hours. In addition to this as the plane that took us up was very small for the flight he was forced to make an additional stop to fuel in Cali Colombia. The planes we had to take us to get to Miami were dirty with broken seats no kind of entertainment (such as TV). The poor and inattentive staff of course had to deal with few resources. The return flight similar. Delays old planes but most of the journey by plane Miami-Santa Cruz had a noise in your engine that was intolerable to the ears. Large number of passengers frightened by the strange sound was heard constantly.	0
Africa World Airlines is unclean, unsafe, unpunctual and unconcerned. My premium economy flight from Kumasi to Accra was delayed by 2 hours after checking in but nobody from the airline told us any reason. All the passengers were crowded into a small area with no social distancing as if there was no pandemic happening. When we finally boarded the flight, the hostess was constantly removing her nose mask to flirt with some politician in the front seat. I asked her for a cup of coffee and was refused because she said only water is allowed due to COVID. For the extra price that we are paying for premium economy and the number of hours that they hold us hostage we deserve better! The seat was dirty and the armrest plastic was chipped, while the signs on the ancient noisy plane were all in Chinese. You could feel the plane shaking the whole time during the flight which makes you wonder if they even do proper maintenance. We finally reached our destination nearly 3 hours late but my baggage did not arrive. There were people from earlier flights also waiting there for their bags so this seems to be a very common thing. The airport staff were rude and told us to wait and maybe our bags would come, maybe not. I wound up missing my flight on Turkish Airlines while waiting for the bag and had to pay for a hotel and to get a new PCR test to travel the next day. I will never fly with this airline again even if it was the last airline in the world and nor will I allow my loved ones to risk their lives. Next time I will just take the VIP bus from Kumasi to ensure I arrive in comfort and punctuality.	0
AWA needs to be held accountable for their bad service. They have never been on time ever in all the times that I have flown on their planes. The planes are small and old and dirty and staffs are rude and arrogant. It is normal for your flight to be two or three hours delayed every time. But if you come even one minute late for checking in they will sell your seat to another person and make you buy it again. During the flight they used to give sandwiches and pastries and juices but now only water is given for flights of almost one hour. Also during the Covid times they are not maintaining any social distancing on the plane.	0
Africa World Airlines is the worst airline in the world.  I was supposed to fly from Lagos to Accra on the 3rd of September, but my flight was cancelled without notice. I tried to travel again on the 7th of September but this was also cancelled. They have no office in Lagos so I had to drive all the way to the airport every day, only to find that they were closed. I was finally able to book my flight after paying 20,000 Naira to one of the airport workers who knew someone who worked there. They also require you to pay 50,000 Naira to take an expensive Covid test before they allow you to board their flights. When I reached the airport for travel, they refused to check me in because I was wearing a face shield instead of a mask and they made me pay extra to buy a mask from one of the airport shops. Then when we arrived in Ghana, they charged me another £120 to take another test at the airport there. Why can't they just charge one single price for their services instead of advertising one price and then trying to squeeze more money out of their poor customers? The Covid tests should also be free for their passengers instead of trying to make even more profit from us who are struggling with reduced income in the pandemic. I will never fly with this airline again.	0
Accra to Freetown. Terrible service. 4 hours before our scheduled flight and cancelled our flight. There was no notice from the airline, we received the email after we were told that it was cancelled. The customer service response was not professional. When asked for why it was cancelled, we were notified that it was a technical problem which is surprising that 4-hours before the flight, only then did they think about confirming a cancelled flight. Normally, airlines would provide compensation to make sure the customer is not inconvenienced. Their first question was, "do you have a place to stay here in Ghana?" This of course should not be the first question to ask a customer who is not from the country. Had it not been for the collective anger and frustration of all passengers on the original flight, there would not have been any quick movement to get us on another flight. Even though it is a small airline or growing airline, the experience was more frustrating for us as a customer. Lastly, the manager or person in charge of transferring us to another flight did not care enough to get our contact information to notify us that we had successfully been transferred to another flight. Instead, when we happened to pass by again he looked at us surprised saying "Why are you here? You should be checking in right now at the other airline!". When we were never told of such thing at all. Overall, a frustrating experience and not looking to book with Africa World Airlines ever again. I would hope to be wrong and they improve, but the stress and risk of surprise cancellation are not worth entertaining the cheaper fare. I cannot comment on inflight experience because - well, I didn't fly with them.	0
Accra to Kumasi. The flight was cancelled three times. I book the flight 2pm which was more expensive than travelling in the evening, but at long last I travel in evening which I don't like. And when I was coming was the same cancellation also three times cancellation	0
Kumasi to Accra. Very bad service, my flight was delayed over 2hours and there was no communication from the staff as to the time we will board the flight. Neither did they show any sense of sympathy towards our being delayed. They completely ignored us knowing that there’s not much we can do. It mess up my business trip . I will surely not use this service again.	0
Firstly the take off was delayed with no announcements when we asked at the desk they just said 'we will go when we go'! Once on the plane we noticed it is empty so we had extra space but it looks like they failed to clean properly my table was covered in food smears when I asked for a wet towel to wipe it off I was told to 'just relax man just chill'! It was almost funny how clueless they were! Staff were friendly but no idea of customer service or professionalism. The quality of the food seems to be dependant of the airport you last left leaving SA or the UK the food was ok with a North African theme but when we left Tripoli the food was inedible. The flights are dry so they only serve warm juice or soda. The movies are heavily censored at first it's quite amusing but it gets irritating after a while. Woman's shoulders are blurred out and they even censor out all references to alcohol or gambling but blood death & murder are all good! Tripoli Airport is awful you can barely breath for the smoke and there's no organisation it's like going back it time.	0
Have just flown to and from Tripoli. They were late leaving Gatwick on the outward journey due to missing passengers and luggage having to be removed but check-in etc was fine although we only had hand luggage. We returned on a new A320 Airbus. We left Tripoli on time and touched down at Gatwick on the dot. The service was fine and the food was acceptable.	0
Just don't travel with this company. It's simply not worth it. It's not a trustful company. It was my first try with it, but they have already disappointed me. They cancelled my return flight Paris to Sao Paulo with a message saying only: "your flight is cancelled. If you need to contact us, go to our webpage or call us on xxxx number (0,06 euros per minute)". I tried to call immediately, and I didn't get any answer. I tried many times. Then I requested a refund through the online form and I'm waiting to see how much time they will take and how much they will actually refund once their policy says they do not refund services fees, which they put up the double price of the actual flight. My guess is that they do that very often to oblige costumers to fly with them when they want, or when they have enough passengers. They cancel your dates and then you will have to rebook your flight to another date which they will impose to you and which may be the one there are enough passengers. I won't do that though. I will get my refund, whatever they refund and never deal with them anymore.	0
Kiev to Paris. So, I bought tickets 1.5 months before the trip. Unfortunately, plans had changed, I had to cancel my trip. I also purchased insurance for cancellation with tickets. So a week before the flight, I wanted to cancel my tickets. I tried to call for 3 days in a row to their support line and every time I was listening to music for 10-15 minutes and getting billed for that (calling from abroad is quite expensive), but no one ever picked up the phone (during their official business hours). I sent multiple emails about my request - no reply. I tried to submit multiple requests via manage my booking on their website - but every time I tried to submit I got the ticket number with status closed right away and no ability to check it. So, in the end, I just lost my money and their insurance is worthless as nobody will ever get back to you. Do not recommend at all. First time seeing such big company who does not care about their customers at all. And their website has a lot of bugs as well. Find another company to flight with.	0
I visit my parents regularly in Paris, I always use Air France, Transavia, or Middle east airlines. But today was the first and last flight with this Aigle Azur. On the passport my name is Ludovic while on the ticket its Ludwig. The family name is the same. So because of 3 letters difference, they want to charge 80 euros. Why changing 3 letters cost 80EUR? This is how you lose passengers.	0
It was my first time flying with Aigle Azur. To be honest, I didn't choose it, but Hainan Airlines. To start with, we took off with more then 2 hours delay without notifications. It wasn't the airport issue, but the company problem, because we had to wait for the plane to arrived from Sao Polo. I will skip the on-board service. So we arrived with 2 hours delayed, and, with other customers, we have a connection flight to Shanghai. This second flight is Hainan Airlines. Obviously the flight didn't wait for us. No one to received us after landing to give instructions or anything. When we asked to change the connection flight ticket at Hainan counter, we are told "Aigle Azur didn't confirmed the delay in your flight, so we can't change your flight ticket". The company is late and didn't even assume its responsibility. As a result, we had to pay for an other flight ticket, Aigle Azur customer service doesn't even exist / isn't reachable. Worst airline I experienced, I should have considered to read the reviews about this airline first.	0
Beirut to Paris. Worst experience ever! I booked online a two way ticket for a very tight scheduled business flight and after taking the money from my bank account a few days later i received a notification that the return flight was rescheduled to two days later which does not suite me although tickets offerings for the same date were still available on many sites online. A couple of days later the original return flight was totally cancelled. I was later offered in return another ticket two days earlier or full refund. Upon choosing the full refund I got back less than 40% of my paid amount for this trip and the argument was that they only full refund the return ticket that was changed and the outbound ticked is non refundable. The funniest thing is that the cancelled flight was charged much less than the outbound flight and this was the only amount subject to full refund. I never recommend Aigle Azur. I rate this act as a sort of phishing. They lie to you about cheap available flights and then reschedule it based on their interest so you will be the only and major loser for cancelling if the rescheduling does not suite you.	0
Basel Mulhouse to Algiers on 19/03/206. It was scheduled for 14:50 and departed at 20:06, without any explanation, excuse or apology. The only representative the company had at the airport could not give any information, nor provide any help to the hundreds of passengers stuck at the airport. What is even worse is that the company has no customer service to contact, no telephone number and no email address. The only way to contact the company is through a form on their website to which you will never get any answer ever! 	0
Lyon to Oran. Two Airbus A320 are mainly dedicated for operations between Lyon ad Algeria. I would allow that the service tends to decrease. I can't stand how Aigle Azur operates "charter planes with high density configuration for regular flights between France and Algeria. It is unbearable to get sat so tight in those seating rows impossible to move or eat correctly.	0
Worst experience with an airline, ever! Completed booking, completed payment with my bank and got forwarded back to a website that said "error". No confirmation, no tickets received but the money was gone. Called with customer service and got disconnected a total of 6 times while being on hold. When I finally did speak to someone, she informed me there was a booking with reservation number but something on their side went wrong with the payment. She gave me the reservation number and on their website I could find my flight details. But still no tickets. I had to e-mail the ventasonline department who would be able to provide me the tickets. The communication with ventasonline was pointless. They first told me my booking didn't exist and I should book a new flight. I showed them a print screen of my bank payment and the booking with the reservation number and then it all of a sudden did exist, they would write me back about a solution for the money or tickets but they never did. Called with customer service again and they would all say something different or that I had to call back in an hour so they would know more. Did that a total of 4 times when I just lost my patience and the only thing they told me I could do was write an official complaint. As a reply, I received an automated e-mail telling me to contact customer service, so basically super pointless and you're just going around in circles with no one knowing how to help you get either your money back OR give me the damned flight tickets. I always book direct with an airline so that this stuff doesn't happen, but Aerolineas Argentinas apparently doesn't care about their clients and actual customer service. It has been 3 weeks now since booking and still haven't received my money. They tried to make me book a new ticket before receiving the money back but of course I don't have any trust with them anymore so booked with another airline (Air France) and everything went fine. This was my first experience with Aerolineas Argentina and for sure my last. Will avoid flying with them at all costs. By the way, because I paid with credit card my money is safe. I got confirmation from my bank and credit card provider that I was in my right and would receive money back via them. But it's really just pathetic that it has to go like that.	0
After paying over $6K for two business class seats for our honeymoon, we were first told we weren’t able to sit together and that it was our fault because we could have purchased seats ahead of time, even though we could not see anything via the Delta or AA websites that would allow us to change our seats or check in online (also what? We paid business so you mean to tell me there’s even more of a price for seat choice even when you can’t see it online?) Then after an hour and a half wait at the passport control security line (no one seemed to be working at all) an hour and a half delay they had flagged my wife’s boarding pass and made her - a business customer - wait until the entire plane boarded ahead of her before they would let her on the flight. She got on the plane crying. Then the flight attendant was rude about it. I am disgusted and we will never fly this airline again. It’s okay if you’d like to check a passenger again but when they pay for priority and you board the entire plane before them? You are disgraceful. You ruined the last day of our honeymoon and we are disgusted with Delta for connecting us with this airline.	0
On 10 August 2022 we purchased refundable return airline tickets with Aerolineas Argentinas from Cordoba to Ushuaia the port of embarkation for a December Antarctic cruise, returning Ushuaia to El Calafate. Two weeks later the expedition company cancelled our cruise citing ship delays. We immediately cancelled our AA flight reservations. The airline confirmed a refund was due under the fare conditions and would be paid within 120 days in December 2022. After hours of follow-up effort and numerous late night communications via Messenger and Translation apps with service agents in South America and their service centre in Florida USA, no refund has been paid after 5 months. How can this airline sell, and charge extra for flexible/refundable tickets if they have no intention of honoring their fare conditions?	0
I was flying red eye from Bogota to Montevideo with a connection in Buenos Aires and my flight was delayed over 5 hours. This caused me to sleep at the airport and have my connection rescheduled so that I not only arrive late at night to where I cannot check in to my reservation and more importantly I miss out on a valuable day of vacation. There was no staff at the airport when I arrived at the gate or anywhere beyond the checkpoint. And no one would show until 2.45am, which is 7 hours after I arrived. No one to help with their mistake. When staff did arrive I asked for any form of accommodation. Sleeping at airport? Nothing. An earlier connection? Nothing. Cancelation (I unfortunately have another couple flights with this airline) since now I only have 2 days in Montevideo? Nothing. Money or points? Nothing. There’s nothing they can do but pass me off to the next stop. This is my first and lasting impression with them and after my trip it will be my last time flying them.	0
Absolutely disgraceful. The airline made us wait 2.5 hours in Madrid to issue our boarding passes. There is no business lounge. The service was generally unfriendly. Everything was an effort. No flat bed. The food came on a trolley and was most unappetizing. No menu printed and only two options. Poor presentation. When we arrived in Buenos Aires, we had to wait 1.25 hours with no announcement or explanation for our luggage. Our luggage was wet and clothes in luggage also wet.	0
A scheduling disaster. Five flights booked, all five were rescheduled. Not only that, but the rescheduling included connections that didn’t make sense anymore: first leg landing after the second leg departs, and with no further options during that day. First, they changed the first flight of five, and only offered to rebook that one for free (even though it affected the following 4) so I had to pay for the change of the following four flights myself. Then, as the dates approached they changed (multiple times) the remaining four flights, up to the point that my last flight is to a completely different city. I will avoid this airline at all costs whenever I have a choice. An embarrassment and a scam.	0
Awful customer service! I booked 5 flights with the airline. 1) Customer Service not responsive: I had to miss my 4th flight due to an unexpected situation. The airline allows change/cancellation if it is >1.30hour prior to the flight time - I have tried contacting the airline by calling and WhatsApp, no replies - I had no choice but to forego this booking and purchase a new ticket from a different airline. The WhatsApp reply came 12 hours later and did not even read the chat above. 2) Unclear policies - As a result of missing my 4th flight, the airline automatically removed my 5th flight from the system - The airline did not allow me to check in and I had wasted 1 extra hour in talking to the sales office. The sales office wouldn't issue a new ticket for me as it is "impossible" to fly today now, the earliest flight available is in 2 days which is unacceptable. 3) Awful service from staff - I complained "how am I supposed to know?" that they would remove my 5th flight because I missed my 4th one (they are 1.5 days apart), the staff responded "now you know" - The staff even scolded me for not arriving to the airport earlier.	0
Having booked flight over a month in advance, they over sold the flight. Did not notify us until we were at the check in counter, 90min before the flight. Basically told us we would have to wait 8 hours and hopefully get the next flight. If you are thinking of booking with this airline please reconsider. For your own peace of mind. Customer service is not in their intentions, only taking your money.	0
Absolute disgrace. By far the most sketchy, unprofessional airline I ever dealt with. Flights canceled due to Covid.  Argentinean Airlines have disconnected all phones and no one ever replies on WhatsApp. I mean using a free app to communicate with customers - all you need to know about their level. I have received one reply saying that they have reimbursed me on November 30th. It's February and it's clear that that's a lie - I have not received a penny. By the way, I have paid for flexible ticket, so it was refundable regardless of the Covid situation.	0
By far the worst customer service I have ever experienced (basically there is none). One of these airlines where things are ok as long as there is no issue, otherwise you are in for a treat. Flight cancelled in April (no reason provided but covid would be the logical guess) and still no reimbursement or even reply to my many requests over the last 8 months. There is no number to contact the company, they only give you a WhatsApp number to call (no one answers) or ask you to do so on Facebook (and again they do not reply).	0
Buenos Aires to New York. My first and last international flight with this airline. Literally nothing about our experience approached business class standards for a full-service airline: inattentive and rude flight attendants who were absent for most of the 11-hour trip and routinely ignored call buttons no preflight drinks or even water or hand towels I had to ask for an amenity kit as the crew forgot to hand them out they banned the use of the front lavatory claiming it was "company policy" and did not clean the two others very often. The onboard entertainment was non-existent and no one was watching any of the few movies offered. It gets even worse: the meal service was the worst I've ever had in business or first class on any airline. It came not on a plate but in an aluminium foil-wrapped tin container and was inedible. Our flight departed at 11:30 pm and they started meal service two hours later, which is unacceptable for passengers who want to eat and go to sleep. I'm a Diamond Medallion with Delta, so at least I got the miles, but Skyteam needs to seriously rethink having this airline as part of its alliance.	0
Buenos Aires to Mendoza. We had booked several flights with Aerolineas Argentinas but me missed the first one due to a cancelled flight to Argentina (not Aerolineas Argentinas). So we missed that flight but bought a new ticket to our first destination. Did not think much of it until we were at the airport for our next destination. We were informed that since we missed the first flight, all our tickets were cancelled. To avoid this we could pay a fees for no-show and other penalties for a total of USD 688 per person. That is more then the tickets cost! There was no email that informed of this. The interest of ground staff to resolve this was zero. it more felt like extortion. It we at least got an email saying that since you missed your flight you have to confirm the rest of your tickets then we would have had a chance to at least avoid a very stressful situation. Our carefully planned vacation is shot. We are trying to get new tickets but will miss several of the planned activities. We are losing time (sitting at airports). We are losing lots of money (buying new ticket) but not Aerolineas Argentinas  again! Avoid if at all possible!	0
COR - EZE (Buenos Aires). Our first and last flight with this airline on 12/06/2019. The flight was 2 hours late leaving Cordoba, with no reason given for the delay. We were not informed until after check in and the only information about the delay was on flight departure monitors in the departure lounge. In spite of having a long haul, international flight connection with Air France (a SKYTEAM partner airline) on arrival in Buenos Aires, Aerolineas staff showed no concern that we might miss the connection and when asked whether it was necessary to change terminal in Buenos Aires to make the connection gave erroneous information. (We were told it was necessary to change terminal when in fact it was not). On arrival in Buenos Aires we had 59 minutes to check which terminal our onward flight was departing from and make our connection. No assistance of any kind was given by Aerolineas staff. We made our connection but our luggage did not, inspite of being checked through to its final destination on check in. We understand that our luggage has followed on a later Aerolineas flight, via Madrid, but we have yet to receive it. We received an email on return home from Aerolineas Argentinas, sent on the same day of departure, 3 hours after the flight should have left Cordoba and actually at around the time of arrival in Buenos Aires. It declared that the flight departure time had been re-scheduled! In 35 years of international travel, I have never experienced such utterly brazen incompetence on the part of an airline carrier, whose flight attendants were unconcerned, utterly unhelpful and ignorant of international flight connection arrangements with a SKYTEAM airline partner. Of course, we will never book with this airline again and cannot recommend it in any way.	0
I booked my trip via AMEX Web Site to travel from the US to Argentina for the 2019 eclipse. My name on the ticket defaulted to the name on the card using my initials of my first and middle name. I noticed this today, a full two weeks before my flight from the US to Argentina. AMEX and I called Aerolineas Argentinas to update the name on the ticket. The only option was to cancel the flight and rebook to update the name on the ticket. The replacement tickets was $2500 more than the original tickets $3300, plus no refund of any kind. I can't afford to pay another $5500. In addition now I have to cancel 2 more round trip flights that I had booked with Aerolineas Argentinas for domestic Argentina flights for a total of $1500 and I have cancel 7 nights of hotel bookings with no refunds. I'm out $5000 just because the airline could not update the name from initials to my name. Maybe all airlines are like this, but never did I think such a simple change would cause me such a loss. The Aerolineas Argentinas agent first hung up on the AMEX rep and when we called back we got a different rep who seemed to know of my situation and he was unapologetic and extremely rude. He said while I was on the phone that he refused to speak with me.	0
Horrible service, flight from Buenos Aires to Rio de Janeiro supposed to depart at 18:20 on the 31st May 2019 and it was delayed to 2:15am the next morning, more than 8 hours waiting and no one knows anything, gave us a voucher to eat in a poor place called La Churrasquita. Should give a voucher that we choose where we eat, and a place to stay and sleep!	0
You have two terrible choices for flying within Argentina. Latam is a disaster (I'll post more on them - it is truly the worst airline I have ever flown), but not too far behind is Aerolineas. No video, cramped seats, no food even for sale, no beer or wine for sale (this in a country where wine is everywhere). The plane looked and felt dated and worn. Service is indifferent. By contrast, we flew them many years ago where food and beer/wine was complimentary. They have made a decision to go cheap, and it shows in virtually all aspects of the experience of enduring their product. In the US, this would be like flying Spirit, or in Europe, this would be like flying Ryanair. Yes, it is that bad - and I am not prone to exaggeration. At least Spirit and Ryanair don't pretend to be full-service airlines. Aerolineas does, which makes this is even more infuriating. Like I said, virtually all the domestic routes in Argentina are via Latam and Aerolineas. On top of that, almost all the flights go through Buenos Aires city airport (which is actually quite nice). But that means you will have a layover if you are going from one city to another within Argentina that does not include BA. In summary, choosing between Latam and Aerolineas is like choosing between being waterboarded or electrocuted. Just pick the cheaper option, eat before boarding, and just endure this torture.	0
Buenos Aires to Rio Grande. When you enter a plane of aerolineas, you immediately fall on the reward of Trip, it gives confidence. Mistake, our 2 flights were incredible, both late (25 minutes for the first and 1:30 for the second), no information, we only warn you when the boarding time arrives, quietly.  Following the bad reviews on the forums, and the endless malfunction of the website, we decided to go to the Ushuaia agency to get info on our flight back which was currently nonexistent. ou arrive at check in and there are twenty people at the opening, count 10 to 15 minutes per person minimum. The flight: late, in a dirty plane, the hostesses jostle, splashes and the breakfast is served by running because it seems that it is already very late to do so and for good reason, we land almost at the same time. Add to that the difficulties to pay a ticket on the site, the total lack of communication (no response on any media available), that's a lot for the same company. In short, we are far from paradise.  Low-end company at a bargain price!	0
Montevideo to Buenos Aires. Airline act as if it doesn't need any clients in every interaction with the customer. I finally managed to book a flight connecting through their hub in Aeroparque in Buenos Aires. The day before the flight, I managed to check in online after only the second attempt, for the system crashed only once. The bag drop, boarding and flight went reasonably smoothly. However, economy seats are small even for a 5'9" person. In flight entertainment was non existent. On board catering options were bland for a 3 hour plus flight. Connecting in Aeroparque, the international connections terminal is more like a holding pen for tourists with a duty free. Dull uncomfortable seats and one catering option with plenty of microwaveable foodstuffs. Second flight went smoothly, pretty quick hop. On the way back, something I have never seen on any airline belonging to an alliance happened: upon trying to ship a box of fragile items, which I have done numerous times in the past with several airlines (even low costs), the check in personnel refused to do so claiming the airline did not ship fragile items. In the end I had to rearrange the fragile items inside my hand luggage and ship it, and carry a card box full of garments that I had to take out of the bag through two flights and an overnight stay at the airport, all while expecting the worst to my luggage. Fortunately, a rigid bag and smart packing with clothes assured the items arrived in an almost intact state. Never again.	0
El Calafate to Ushuaia. We are on a 28-day South America Tour from Australia totalling 15 flights ( 13 with Latam and 2 with air Argentina) and the Latham tickets stated 23kg by 2 pieces baggge per person while the Air Argentina tickets stated one piece without specifying the weight. My wife and I had one piece each of 21kg and no carry on luggage. At check in counter today we were told that the limit per person was 15kg so we must pay 1300 Pesos ( approx 40 USD) and the bags went straight onto the conveyor belt without allowing us to reduce the weight by carrying on some items. We have travelled extensively two to three trips each year and never had a 15kg limit. The airline should have specified the limit if it was below the norm and offered the passenger the option of carry on if over limit at check in. This action was blatantly robbery and deserved to be named and shamed.	0
San Luis to Buenos Aires. Avoid this airline!  Flights from San Luis to Buenos Aires were cancelled throughout the day blaming "meteorologic conditions", even though there was nothing unusual and flights were flying everywhere else with no problem. Customers were advised about the cancellations just minutes before the flight departure (via email), leaving everyone in limbo. When calling customer centre, they were very rude, and said that the tickets did not qualify for reimbursement, only could be rescheduled for another day. Of course, they wouldn't pay accommodation or anything else either. When trying to discuss options with them, they simply hang up. Finally, many passengers opted to take the bus and claim the money later on (good luck with the claim, anyway). Unfortunately, they have the monopoly of many flight routes in the country and there is no competition, so they charge whatever they like for a very poor service. They not only cancel flights with no notice, half of the time there is a strike or some other reason to leave people stranded. Fly this airline at your own risk	0
Flew Aerolineas from Buenos Aires to Iguazu. One of the most dysfunctional organisations I've ever had to deal with. There is clearly no one who is capable of running a customer focused business who works at this airline. The call centre staff were rude and continuously put me through to a disconnect line. The website forms say 72 hour turnaround times, and no replies are received. I have flown countless airlines worldwide, this is by a very long way, the worst. I would not recommend this airline to people I didn't like, let alone anyone I did.	0
Buenos Aires to El Calfate. My initial flight with the company was okay, if nothing to write home or review about however my attempted trip back was horrible. The flight was cancelled. I received only a notice the late night before with no explanation. I had no way of getting information as it was a weekend and they do not have weekend hours. When I went to the airport I was informed there were no flights due to a strike. Now while this may have effected more than one airline they did not offer a refund or remedy, or even an apology or sympathy for their clients. I was one of the lucky ones that got in before they left at 2 pm and basically every other passengers had to learn via word of mouth why and how long (5 days before reschedule) they had to wait. Basically swarms of people waiting for information. At the very least there should be an email and apology, truly there should be a refund.	0
I flew Aerolineas on a two week trip with my family from JFK --> Buenos Aires --> Bariloche --> Mendoza --> Buenos Aires --> JFK. I was always a little annoyed with them. I waited on the phone for 30 minutes the day before my flight to reserve seats for the flights and when I showed up to the airport they had no record of my phone call (even though I had gotten an email with seat confirmation) and they had already given away our seats. Given that we had an international flight on our itinerary, we were entitled to two checked bags for each of our flight legs, and every single time they tried to charge us and we had to remind them that we got two free bags - I think they were trying to dupe us. What was most frustrating was that they cancelled our flight home with just over 24 hours advance notice because of a "technical difficulty" with the plane, and instead of having the direct flight from Buenos Aires to JFK that we paid for, they re-booked us (after 1 hour on hold) on a flight to New Jersey. I had a connection from JFK to Boston that I obviously missed, and ended up having to pay for another very expensive flight. I filed a claim and never heard back. I called once to follow up and after 45 minutes on hold I was promised that all claims were addressed within 22 days. 22 days came and went and I never heard back again. I made four additional follow-up phone calls, and each time I was on hold from anywhere from 10 to 45 minutes before I could speak to someone. Every person I spoke to gave a different explanation - from this is the wrong phone number to claims take 2 months (not 22 days) to call Expedia. When I finally started asking to speak to supervisors, two times I was actually hung up on. It is ridiculous that I paid for a flight to JFK, they cancelled it, offered me a flight to another airport, and when I declined, I can't get my money back. I fly a lot, and this airline is the worst I've come across.	0
Cordoba to El Calafate via Buenos Aires. The worst kind of service I could expect from an airline.  We were on a flight from Cordoba to El Calafate via Buenos Aires with a one hour layover in Buenos Aires. First our original flight from Cordoba got canceled (airline's fault) and we were put on a flight which was 40 mins later. This would've meant us missing out on our connection. But when we landed our connecting flight also got delayed by 50 mins. Now the ground staff still refuses to check us in on our original connection with atleast an hour to spare for our original flight to depart. I don't think I will ever fly Aerolineas Argentinas again.	0
El Calafate to Buenos Aires. We have had several flights with Aerolineas Argentinas. All of them were terrible but I'm going to start reviewing just this last one. We arrived earlier at the airport think we could probably take an earlier flight. Once at the desk of Aerolineas they told us we will have to pay for the change a fee and they told us the fee will be 413 pesos (around $27) which we agreed. They moved us to a different desk to pay and after waiting 30 minutes they told us that the fee was 2800 pesos (around $180) per person. When we said the other person said a different amount they said that this person did a mistake. They had 4 flights before ours and they couldn't have the small gesture of moving to any of them for a reasonable amount. I called the company asking for customer service and they said they don't have customer service. We also did business class from Miami to Buenos Aires with them. I have never seen a dirtiest seat. The tv didn't work, jumping the movies from minute 10 to 30 or stopping.	0
Buenos Aires to Ushuaia via Trelew. Worst flight experience ever had. Strongly discourage any traveller to travel with such an unprofessional airline as Aerolineas Argentinas. We arrived to Buenos Aires at 11pm and that same evening the airline cancelled our 7am flight due to a staff strike the next day. No additional information, no re-routing, no support. Nothing to help international passengers. The next day we spent 8 hours in a queue to get a new flight and were sent o another airport, one hour away from the EZE. Again four hours queue to be put on a waiting list that never provided a flight. After 24 hours waiting, all on our expenses, we were sent directly to Ushuaia (instead of Trelew), lost flights, hotels and car rental, with ZERO compensation. We will certainly avoid Aerolineas Argentinas for their lack of professionalism and mistreatment of clients.	0
Buenos Aires to Ushuaia. Aerolineas Argentinas workforce went on strike on 19DEC and suspended activities in the morning until midday this was not the airline's fault but the airline did not do anything at all to assist the passengers manage the situation before, within or after the event. Just the night before this strike, the airline sent an email confirming flight departure date/time, knowing that the flight would be cancelled due to the strike. At the airport the airline did not provide any support at all to the thousands of passengers affected. All the information provided was that we needed to wait until 1pm to find out what was going to happen with our flights. The airport was a mess of people everywhere. At 1pm when the staff returned to work, all passengers were told to call a toll-free number to get support, no staff at the airport offered to help passengers at all the toll-free number was congested with calls and there was an automated message asking people to call again the next day - how is that possible when people had flights to take to get back home or to reach a destination where hotels or other items had already been paid. The only reason why we were helped was that we complain so much and remained at the check-in window requesting somebody to help us with our flights, we had to ignore the negative treatment by some of the staff and their management and just held our position until someone decided to help us and put us on a flight - we arrived to our destinations after losing 1 day on our holiday and upon our return discovered that after that whole situation Aerolineas Argentinas cancelled our return flights which had nothing to do with the original flights impacted by the strike. Once again we found ourselves at the Ushuaia airport being told we had no flights, having to deal with very poor attitude from the airline staff at the check-in counters, but repeated our behaviour as on the first flight and told the staff we would not move until somebody helped us as we had nothing to do with the cancellation of our flights. Finally, a manager agreed to put us an a waitlist and we were lucky to fly back to Buenos Aires. I would not fly Aerolineas Argentinas ever again if I can avoid it and I have recommended all my relatives and friends to do the same.	0
The most dirty airplane I’ve been in, gum sticked to the chairs, drops of dry dirt everywhere, the table is dirty also something was poured on it and wasn’t cleaned.	0
Amman to Barcelona via Algiers. I would not recommend this airlines at all. During my trip from Amman to Barcelona through Algiers, all my checked in luggage was lost, and it has not been found since. I submitted two claims, but the airline never got back to me (not answering phone or email).	0
Algiers to Paris, the worst airline ever. Aircraft is old and dirty. Flight time was delayed and postponed. The check in process at counter is very slow. The only efficiency thing is their system down time. The staff is not well trained etc.	0
This airline has constant maintenance issues, the plane on arrival lost one engine. The replacement plane came in late, we were told they were in touch with the connecting airline, someone would be getting us from the plane and immediately escort us to the connecting flight. They confirmed multiple times that the connecting airline would hold. When we landed, we saw the connecting flight pull away from the gate. The connection was only available once per week. They would take no responsibility, we had to buy a ticket to another airport (Fort-de-France) to catch a connection to our destination the next day. Change fees, extra ticket, hotel for the night, taxi, food, etc. cost us $500 per person. Air Antilles lied to us every step along the way and did not cover a penny of the extra expenses they were responsible for. Do not fly this airline.	0
Point-à-pitre to Saint Martin. This airline is disgusting. They have no respect for people or their time. They are the most unhelpful and rudest people we have ever encountered on an airline. They were unwilling to help us try to book an earlier flight, after discovering the plane was delayed two hours which would have made us late for an unexpected funeral we were to attend. Then, even though it was two hours late, they still made us go into the boarding zone, where there was no food and only warm bottles of water in an expensive vending machine. Once, the plane was finally nearing boarding time, they announced another hour of delay. Delays are common and sometimes unavoidable, However, the rudeness and complete lack of help is unacceptable. We not only felt like we were receiving attitude because we were white, we also just felt that they didn’t feel like dealing with us because they were too busy eating lunch. Unacceptable. Do not fly with them. We should not be giving them our hard earned money.	0
Bamako to Algiers. A 21:15 flight was delayed around 21:30. This was the first we heard anything. At around 22:30 we were told the plane would take off the next day. We were fed by 23:00. Around 00:00 shuttles started to a hotel. I got yelled at by airline personnel while boarding a shuttle. The last of us got to the hotel around 2:30 where we were dropped off with no information. The hotel was absolutely horrid. The hotel personnel shared no flight information so around noon the next day I asked for a number for the Air Algerie personnel who'd made the reservation. He picked up after about 3 calls and told me not to call back. Around 17:00 we were told to be ready to depart at 00:00. Around 23:40 2 shuttles came. There was a mad, unorganized rush to board the shuttles because there wasn't enough space. I got pushed and shoved but left behind. One shuttle left the hotel without having its door closed. Around 00:30 another shuttle came and I managed to get on. After standing in line at the airport for an hour I got a new boarding pass. I was assured that the luggage that I had handed over the previous day would be on the plane. Service on the flight was fairly decent. Plane landed around 8:00 and took off fine. The seat was absolutely filthy, however, and the bathroom was disgusting. My luggage did not come in. I tried to report my luggage as lost but was told I could not because I had no baggage claim tickets (they'd been taken by the airline when I got my new boarding pass). I was told to come back the next morning at 3:00. I got yelled at again while reporting the luggage lost.  Another passenger said that a plane from Bamako was coming in at noon and we should wait so I did. luggage came in around 12:30.	0
Algiers to Montreal. The service is very bad, actually, there is nobody to whom to talk my flight was supposed to be on Tuesday at 1240, But we flight at 1830 cause a strike. The food was  inedible. I missed my connection in Montreal to Toronto (knowing I bought my ticket 160$) And for sure, no one from Air Algerie in Montreal to receive us. I spent the night in the airport. I will never ever take this company again.	0
Our Aerolineas Argentinas flight Cordoba-Buenos Aires was canceled during our check in for the first leg in Rosario, the “compensation” was to travel in a cramped taxi with no luggage space, had to carry bags on our laps for 5 hours, to Buenos Aires. We have had no reply to refund request, by what others said, this seems to be usual with Aerolineas Argentinas. Will never fly with them again.	0
We flew on A330 EZE-JFK-EZE seats are too closed to each other I'm 5 9 tall and had problems with my legs this is what happen when airlines prefer only profit instead of customer service + profit EZE-JFK was 1 hour delayed and JFK-EZE 45mins delayed. Ground staff in both airports terrible neither courteous nor willing to help you. My greatest concern is flight attendants: most of the cabin crew and I mean 90% were rude they got angry if you requested a glass of water or soda (even though you walk to the aft galley to do so). During dinner one female flight attendant offered me chicken or pasta I asked her what kind of pasta and sauce she told me: "sir I'm not the chef who cooked the meals".	0
Flight Paris CDG - Algiers. Flight was more than 3 hours late and no explanations were given by the Air Algerie ground staff. The aircraft was old and very dirty. Food was still on my seat. Cabin crew were very unprofessional and not friendly at all. Food was ok. Only one toilet was in service. I will never fly again with Air Algerie.	0
Picked flight based on price. Flight from Miami to Buenos Aires was delayed by 6 hours and then canceled until the next day due to mechanical problem with plane. Re-booked on flight the next day. Luggage did not arrive in Buenos Aires for four days. Return flight delayed by 3+ hours resulting in missed connection. (All flights including connections on Delta were booked through Aerolineas Argentinas.) No help from Miami staff re-booking connection on partner? Delta. Ground staff in Miami sent us to the Delta counter to figure it out for ourselves. Delta would not rebook without us paying for new flight ourselves. Went back to Aerolineas Argentinas counter to find them closed until that evenings flight. Ended up renting car and driving 13 hours home.	0
DXB-ALG. 4 hours delay without explanation and they didn't give us anything for this. The aircraft (A330) was pretty old the bathrooms were disgusting and the plane was dirty! Very poor service on-board and cabin crews are not professional. The food was not appealing. The overall service was very poor!	0
London Heathrow to Algiers on an old 767. Cabin crew are simply not professional food wasn't appealing and toilets were filthy.	0
ALG-MRS. 3 hours delay and no explanation. Only drinks were offered for this 1hr 10mins international flight. Flight attendants are really not professional.	0
Took 4 flights in Jan: SYD-EZE - no dramas other than ordinary food and lack of entertainment (a tiny central screen that is off color and barely able to hear the audio on my headphones) on a 15.5 hr flight. EZE-FTE - they changed the airport 8 hours before the flight (from EZE to AEP ) luckily I arrived early and they put me on a bus to the other airport. Delayed 30min. FTE-EZE - delayed 3 hours apparently because of storms in BA that morning but I had a 1630 flight and they never managed to catch up. EZE-SYD - delayed 16 hours initially for heavy rain in BA then they needed fresh crew then the new crew arrived late then missed curfew at Sydney airport. We waited at the airport and departure times kept getting pushed back. Missed my domestic connection but was able to rebooked the next day. At least the airport has free Wi-Fi. Staff do not care and were not helpful will never fly them again!	0
By far the worst airline I have flown. Flew Sydney to Buenos Aires in a plane that looked like it was from the 60's. It was filthy on the outside and inside was even worse. When I opened my blanket on the plane it smelt. The staff were almost non existent during the entire flight. For the price I paid spending a few more dollars to fly with a competent airline with modern planes would be completely worth it.	0
My flight was overbooked and I was forced to stay in Brazil for extra 3 days. Staff at Rio airport are very rude. No apology from staff for not having a place for me and my son to return to Sydney. I also lost time at work which I was not paid for. All of this for choosing to travel with Aerolineas Argentinas for many years. I now will travel with any other airline never Aerolineas Argentinas again.	0
My husband and I recently travelled on Aerolineas Argentinas from Buenos Aires. There was no facility for web check-in or to have our seats pre-allocated prior to check-in. We arrived more than 2 hours prior to the flight to be told that the only way we could sit together was to take 2 middle seats in the centre row of the plane. The A340 has a 2-4-2 configuration. In such a configuration 50% of the seats are aisle seats. However it appeared that almost all had been pre-allocated prior to the ordinary check-in opening. In the end we were offered an aisle and a middle seat in the very back row. It is time that Aerolineas recognized that families are entitled to expect to sit together on long haul flights without having to take the worst seats on the plane. Other airlines manage to do this why cant Aerolineas?	0
They delayed my flight by 3 days and were incredibly rude and unapologetic. I was supposed to fly from Sydney to Buenos Aires via Auckland and Santiago. I turned up at the check in counter in Sydney and was told the flight would be delayed because the plane hadn't arrived yet from Auckland but it would only be a couple of hours. When I returned they said the plane would not be arriving after all and that we would not leave Sydney for another two days. Staff were rude and unhelpful and once we were taken to the accommodation we didn't hear from them again except for a piece of paper under the hotel door telling us to be ready at 5am. After two days we went back to airport there was no staff member there and we had to go from counter to counter trying to find out which flight we were on. After finally checking in and going through immigration we were at the boarding gate when we were told that we would not be flying out after all as there was no plane to meet us in Auckland. No staff representative. I ended up changing to LAN Chile who were excellent.	0
Was booked on the flight on the 13th of July from EZE-SYD (which does not go via AKL anymore). I checked- in and everything was confirmed with my seat etc. I was at the airport at 6am for the 8.30am flight. After 1 hour in line I was only half way down the queue. A little bit later other passengers bound for SYD were denied access. The following reason was given: the weather pattern on the route to SYD. Therefore they had to get rid of weight to have a lighter aircraft to make it the entire way. Later we learnt that they had given freight/cargo priority and consequently 80 of us were stranded with the next flight due 3 days later which only had 40 free spots. The employees only spoke Spanish which was hard for people who didn't know the language. Lots of ideas were thrown around but evidently the flight left without us. I had checked the flight the days/weeks before I was due to fly it and noticed that the flight always left EZE delayed by 1-2 hours which could be for similar reasons. Maybe they should go back to flying via AKL to be able to accept all the paid passengers. Their compensation was not good either and I (and several others) decided we wanted a full refund.	0
Horrible food hot plane (and I feel the cold) seat didn't recline. No personal IFE had to watch a tiny screen at front of plane one movie wasn't in English. Didn't see staff much so couldn't get drinks. All flights delayed at both Auckland BA for 6 hrs each. Given measly meal voucher at BA that bought me nothing much. BA Airport was horrible and staff unhelpful. I had no personal effects for 24hrs once I arrived in Rio. I flew them to save $1000 over LAN Chile whom I will fly with next time and just spend the extra.	0
First 6 hours into the flight from Argentina to Sydney - no food or drinks offered to passengers. Audio didn't work food was horrible lots of trays given back full. Staff had little or no courtesy bad movies with the TV screen flickering at all times.	0
Miami to EZE. No online check-in or boarding pass. I had one carry on bag and they tried to make me check it. The plane seemed old the food was ok 2 movies on overhead monitors however my headset didn't work. Attendants were friendly hardly ever saw them except for the 2 "meals" no diet coke and no soft drinks available for breakfast. Landed 25 minutes late after a 9 hour flight with the announcement "another on-time arrival". Saying it doesn't make it so. I have to return on them but I'll not use them again.	0
Booked to fly Sydney to BA 1pm Tuesday it's now Friday and I've made it as far as Auckland. We sat all day at the gate in SYD eventually told flight cancelled due to mechanical problem. After spending 2 nights we left SYD last night only to land in Auckland for 16 hour layover due to crew shortages. No communication other than rumours from hotel staff. Airline had paid for accommodation and meals but very basic. No entertainment onboard other. Due to fly out 10pm tonight. Traveller beware.	0
AEP-USH. The departure time and flight number were different on the e-ticket boarding card and departure screen. Nobody could provide an explanation but in the end that didn't matter as it was 4-5 hours late depending on which time you chose. The aircraft was an elderly MD88 with no APU working hence the interior was stifling when we boarded. Leg room was appalling. The "snack" was inedible and the coffee undrinkable. To cap it all one bag was lost for 4 days.	0
I have flown with Aerolineas about 6 times over the last 4/5 years. Every single flight was either cancelled or delayed. The staff are generally not that bad and they take a lot of stick from people. Food no real issues. The flights themselves are just so unreliable.	0
IGR to AEP. Flight was showing delayed on the airport website still on time on the AR website. Unable to process web check-in. Complete chaos at the airport since the previous flight had been cancelled and the flight after ours was also cancelled. Not a single AR check-in staff or management available. After one hour of waiting with no announcement in English or Spanish or any AR check-in staff in sight we decided to take an 18 hours bus ride to ensure we get to BEU on time for our flight back to Canada the next day.	0
Buenos Aires to Ushuaia return. I flew from Ushuaia back to Buenos Aires and it was absolute chaos. The previous 2 days flights had been cancelled due to Chile Volcano the airport was full of people and there was no organisation or communication for waiting passengers. There were lots of angry passengers a TV crew and lots of police but a lack of Aerolineas staff.	0
Flight was cancelled from Sydney to Auckland on July 28. I knew this as had checked on internet. However when I tried to ring I got cut off 4 times before finally talking to someone. When we finally got to the airport the boy I was travelling with was 'on the list' but I wasn't and was touch an go as to whether I would get a flight at all. All ended well as we finally both got back to NZ even though we were put on different flights. I felt sorry for the staff in Sydney understaffed and under a lot of stress but they were polite and as helpful as possible.	0
New Zealand to Buenos Aires. They cancelled our flights and had wait hours in Argentina. The crew were not polite they did not provide accommodation and did not listen to our complaints. I needed to call to New Zealand to get someone from Aerolineas to answer my queries.	0
We spent 4 weeks in Argentina and took 5 flights with is airline. In this time they lost my baggage for two days cancelled one flight with no previous notice delayed two times and worst of all the last airplane we took tried to depart and stop last minute twice due to technical difficulties. We had to wait for 24 hrs for them to fix it and lost our connections to Mexico. The company refused to assist us to solve any problem and kept saying : there's nothing we can do present your claim on line. I will never flight with Aerolíneas Argentinas again!	0
Flight suspended in Aukland for 24hrs due to an industrial dispute (they told us it was due to an engineering issue but we found out later this was a lie). Although we were put up in a hotel room it still lost us one day out of 10 of our hard saved visit to relatives. Waited in Auckland airport for 8 hrs before they ferried us out to hotel - dinner at 3am and had to be awake by 8 to go again (we had kids with us). Flight home was delayed again at Argentina (captain turned up 2 hours late).	0
I had booked a flight from Greece to Cuba. Due to COVID it was cancelled. I accepted a voucher to travel later. Then came the war and there are no flights over Europe. I asked for my refund and the reply was that I have to travel to Russia to receive my refund from Russian territory by myself. No other options. I didn't have to visit Russia to book my ticket.	0
We reached airport with my children and they mandated to do RT PCR test to return from Mauritius to india for my children who is only 5 years old and not yet attained 6. In the website they have not mentioned that a RTPCR is required for children for age 5. When i said it is their duty to inform the passengers about the mandatory documents to carry for boarding ,they said it should be known by you. First he asked me to take RTPCR test for entire family even after i have shown him the fully vaccinated certificate. Food served in the flight from reunion to Chennai is the worst food. They changed the travel date all of a sudden. Earlier it was booked for 27 July from Chennai and then they rescheduled to 30th.	0
Flew 4 legs from Santiago to Iguazu. First one cancelled and we took next flight 3 hours later. Second one was delayed. The same with third flight. The last one also delayed before we could board and once onboard we had to stay sitting in the plane at Buenos Aires airport for more than an hour in a very warm day.	0
Has your flight been cancelled by Aeroflot themselves? Forget about your money back. You will never see them. I'm waiting for a refund for last 2.5 years!	0
Mauritius to Madagascar via Reunion Island. The flight has been delayed from 4 to 7 and now 9.15 pm, no communication or support from the ground staff. They knew about the delay before the departure from Mauritius but did not inform the customers. Acces to lounge was given only after insistence from us and only to who has asked for it, not to all afected travelers, and no airline representative has spoken to us, as we should be grateful for the lounge access. No alternative connection was offered. Kids and old people were left without even water and waiting confused. Very unprofessional staff and airline!	0
Reunion to Chennai. We were really disappointed in this Air austral. Around 13 hrs delay, they dint provide lounge, and food to still for 4 hours and then all complaint the ground staff and then they issue a burger and one drinks. All ground staff is not at all responding. It’s really bad service.	0
This airline is shambolic. Our direct flight from Paris to Dzaoudzi was cancelled and another given after 3hours but via Reunion. On arrival in Reunion, shoved in my face a letter of apology. Agents very stand offish. Nothing offered, not even water. Crying babies, elderly customers not taken care of. Just herded like cattle to a small gate area. On embarking from Reunion to Dzaoudzi our baggage could be seen on tarmac but not loaded. Advised Purser and Captain but they shrugged shoulders. On arrival in RUN, a total of 8 hours late with no luggage. On return flight to Paris CDG we were advised maybe a stop in East Africa, then told once on plane, going direct. Served a freezing cold salad as an entree and thats all. A dry baby croissant for breakfast, but were made to feel grateful. We pay for service and products but must be grateful for something! I contacted Air Austral under EU LAW 261/2004 for my refund as laid out under EU Legislation & after 17 emails ignoring me, I contacted a third party attorney. Sure enough they are paying up my refund. I can only say, this airline is awful. They hold you to ransom after you pay your hard earned money, treat you like you are doing them a favour, glare at you when questioned, ignore the law they are contractually bound to, serve you cold salad for dinner, lose your luggage, contact you after 6 months once summoned by a lawyer, tell you where they are taking you with no chance to deplane if you need to change your plan. The situation is their Boeing 787 has many technical problems, the Boeing 777 is too big to land in Mayotte, so instead of being truthful, they just lie. Still, they are supposedly 3star?	0
The worst airline i booked with ever, it is not comfortable and I booked flight from Delhi-Sharjah-Amman. Delay happened in Delhi but i arrived Sharjah 15 min before departure of Amman flight and it is same airline so they should wait for 10 min. Instead, Air Arabia employee took my ticket and change my flight to another flight after 6 hours and gave lunch and Breakfast vouchers which means nothing for me. I don’t recommend this airline to anyone.	0
Auckland to Sydney. On the way there flight was delayed almost two hours. Staff were rude requested a bassinet for my 3 month old When boarded plane was told there was nothing? Flight home delayed two hours again no bassinet. Staff did not smile when needed pressed the button and waited 20 minutes?	0
My flight in 2020 was cancelled by Aeroflot Russia one week before the travel date. I have been waiting for over 15 months for a refund that was initially agreed by the airline, however they have not provided me with a refund despite weekly emails and contacts made to them.	0
I had booked tickets for my family to visit me in Denmark in May 2020, the tickets got cancelled and no refund. I contacted customer care and they are suggesting e-voucher. I am ready to take the e-voucher but there is no flight from India to Denmark for this month, next month and in May 2021. So logically I cannot use the e-voucher. Aeroflot don't have flight for using e-voucher so please refund my money.	0
When countries announces border closure, Aeroflot did not notify me of the cancellation of the flight before the borders were closed. I learned about the flight cancellation from the media. When I phoned Aeroflot to change the date of my flight, =I had to stay in the telephone queue for around an hour, and when the operator picked up the phone, she ask me to stay on the line a minute, however went away for at least half an hour and never returned. As tickets for alternative flights were being bought by other people and prices were rising very quickly, the only realistic option was to buy a new ticket from Aeroflot for a date before the closure of borders, and then claim a refund. The price of this new ticket was several times more expensive than the original ticket. Aeroflot have refused to provide a refund for the new ticket. Aeroflot cancelled the flight due to border closure, failed to inform me about it before the border closures, failed to change the date of the flight, and refused to provide a compensation for the new ticket.	0
I purchased a ticket in November 2020 that had no COVID restrictions for transiting in Moscow, there is no policy for COVID testing when you transit Moscow. We were denied boarding for no COVID test, tho our destination, Turkey does not require any. We were denied boarding after being checked in, luggage tagged, boarding passes issued. Manager did not agree to ticket refund, tho it is a refundable ticket.	0
Flight was delayed from Doha with no reason given to passengers. However, afterwards passengers were informed this was due to weather. On return from Sharjah to Doha, in the month of Ramadan, music was played by the airline with Muslim passengers having to listen to the music. I was fed up of listening to a love song forever. Eventually after a passenger complained and it was turned down. We were informed it is computerised they can’t switch it off!	0
Irresponsible and careless handling of our belongings. They asked me to submit my baby stroller at the aircraft and so I did. However, the stroller that I got at my destination was completely broken.	0
Air Arabia charged me the equivalent of 50 euros to put my carry-on bag under the seat. This was the same bag that Ryanair, EasyJet and Air Europa all allowed me to carry for free. Air Arabia's carry-on bag restrictions are ridiculous and when I questioned the check-in person, she told me that all airlines have their own restrictions and later that it was not her problem. I wrote to 'customer service' who simply told me that they suggest people limit the amount of carry-on they bring and refused my request to be reimbursed for a ridiculously small carry-on allowance. I got nothing I didn't get on the 3 other low-cost airlines I traveled with except a little green tag on my bag, indicating that I had been properly cheated & could therefore carry my bag on and place it under the seat in front of me, as I did with the 3 other low-cost airlines for free.	0
I am never flying with this airline again and never will recommend to anybody. I flew with Air Arabia the first time in 2017 and then I left my Pandora under my seat which I bought from Armenia on my way back to UAE. I called customer service several times but nobody was ever willing to help me and just simply said "We found nothing". So that's when I know this airline cannot be trusted or perhaps its crew. 2023 came and my friends decided to book with Air Arabia because it's cheaper so I had no choice but to go with them although I've already warned them how horrible the service of this airline is. We checked in online via the Air Arabia app and when we arrived at the airport, the online check in we did was actually useless as we still had to queue like the others who did not do the online one. They could've put up a separate counter for those who did the online check in like how we have in Dubai. Also, all the crew of this airline looks so evidently unhappy with their jobs that it is reflecting in their service. Getting inside the plane, nobody would even smile or even look at you.  I asked a crew to help me put my luggage up the cabin as I am a little short to reach and she said, "You have to help me because I cannot put it up myself".	0
I bought my tickets for travel in April 2020 for my friend and I and unfortunately because of the Covid-19 my flight was cancelled. I’ve subscribe for a refund and 5 months later I still didn’t get news of it. I’ve send messages and answers was useless. So I’ve called the center the lady on the phone didn’t seem to understand what’s going on and she told me that I can’t do a refund anymore I need to do voucher. So I’ve decided to do my voucher and the website didn’t work. So I’ve sand email to the center again nd this afternoon I’ve tried the voucher with my friend name and she got her voucher back but you can only use 15% on it so how many flight I need to do to have my £800 back?. And with my name I can’t have my voucher I don’t know why for my ticket that put error.  I’ve been fighting during almost 10 months to have my refund. It shouldn’t take that time and that energy to have the money you said you’d pay me back.	0
My flight was cancelled by Aeroflot back in April. We called multiple times throughout April, May and June and I was promised a refund of the full amount. It was obviously not up to me whether to take that flight or not and it is reasonable to expect a full refund. However refund was never provided. I tried to send multiple messages to the airline’s customer service as well with no response. Last week I tried to call Aeroflot customer service. I had to pay for the international call as there are no representatives in Australia where I live. The customer service was extremely poor. To be honest, I have not encountered such poor attitude in years and it was extremely frustrating. The customer service representative could not properly address any of the issues. She said that the only two options are a voucher and reissuing new ticket. Well, I don’t live in Russia or even Europe so there is absolutely no way I can use these options. The reason why I bought a ticket with Aeroflot was that the transfer time was convenient on my way from Rome to Tokyo, I was not even intending to visit Russia. I explained it and no, nothing she was willing to do, just continued quoting new Russian legislation that came into effect half a year after I bought the ticket! I asked to explain how come I was promised a refund previously and was held waiting for months and months and now it’s not an option. She couldn’t explain. She said I can submit complain through the feedback section. I explained that I have tried to communicate the issue through the feedback section already and not getting any response. She said she can’t help with. Then I asked her to connect me to her supervisor and no, she couldn’t do it for some reason. This is the first time ever I couldn’t speak to a customer service manager or a supervisor. Basically the company just decided to keep my money that I paid, go ahead with it and customer service did not care at all. I just lost a lot of money on the international call without any resolution. This situation is absolutely ridiculous and unacceptable. Every other airline I booked with that cancelled flights provided me a refund a while ago, despite COVID-19. Understand there are struggles at the moment and I did accept a voucher from an Australian airline because I can use it living in Australia. But I just can't use an Aeroflot voucher. The ticket wasn’t a cheap ticket either and it was refundable and it is outrageous that I can’t get money back for a ticket that was refundable (and I paid a premium for it to be refundable and have an option to receive a refund). I sent another message to the airline following the call and received the same response about vouchers that is pretty much just their copy paste from the customer service templates. The airline does not care about their customers and reputation and is just exploiting COVID-19 situation to hold customers’ cash for as long as possible (if not indefinite).	0
Aeroflot is not refunding cancelled tickets due to Corona. I booked many flights in the past months, all were refunded in a couple of months. Aeroflot refuses to do that, I am so disappointed.	0
Sydney-Reunion-Mauritius. Cabin crew extremely rude simple requests such as glasses of water plainly ignored. Food was sub standard and if you felt peckish after the meal you were abruptly told to go help yourself at the rear of the plane to a platter of soggy cheese and butter sandwiches. Same for drinks pour- your-own-glass at the back of the pane in full view of the cabin crew who just pretended you didn't exist. Overall cabin crew appeared quite blasé and pompous.	0
The check in counter staff were rude and slow, and whenever you ask them to hurry up because you're late to your flight they say you should've come earlier. Jeddah to Sharjah they forced me to pay for extra luggage for the handbag i came with from Sharjah to Jeddah. I came with this bag same bag, same weight, why you force me pay for it? Either you pay or you split the weight into two bags.	0
On 8th August, 2020 we sent 8 seafarers via Aeroflot by flight SU2578 to London Heathrow where crew should had been departed the same day to the USA. All seafarers hold guarantee letters from agent in the USA, from Company, issued tickets to the USA and valid c1d USA visas. But check-in and registration was refused by Aeroflot at check-in desk and their representative at Sheremetevo Airport showed low competency while refusing registration. Aeroflot representative denied accept immigration exemption of UK government for transit of seafarers with valid C1D visas, refused talking to Company representative and was rude. On hot line of Aeroflot we were told that it is unacceptable that their representative behaved like this. Because of incompetence of Aeroflot employee we lost lot of time and nerves. All was solved once this employee finished his working day and more informed and professional representative let registration for flight for our seafarers.	0
My flight from Madrid to Bangkok got cancelled due to COVID-19 pandemic, I been calling and emailing many times for 5 months, initially, they said it would take up to 10 days to process my refund, then they said they had so many cancellations and have to process each of them manually so I could take up to 2 month, called again after 2 month, they keep saying my refund will be processed buy they can't tell when. I will end up spending more money and time trying to solve this than the money spent on my ticket. They do not provide any solution, neither seem to care, they do not answer my emails. They are ghosting people trying to get them tired of calling emailing, claiming for their money, so they don't have to refund the money, offering vouchers.	0
Having had our flights cancelled due to covid, we were advised we could have a full refund. Several emails and calls to call centre confirmed the refund would be processed. Initially we would have the refund in 5-10 days, then 30 days then they could no longer give a time frame but rest assured our booking was in a special queue to be refunded. Flash forward to today, received an email stating we were getting a voucher. That’s it. Contacted call centre again who are now saying we can rebook or wait 3 years for a refund. Appalling customer service throughout this whole situation, €1000 down the drain as will not be flying anywhere during the voucher validity. I don’t see how you can confirm a refund is being processed then turn around and say it’s no longer an option. Shameful company, would not deal with them again in future even if it was my only option.	0
Vilnius to Tokyo via Moscow in January 2020 was a nightmare because my luggage was damaged and I spent about a month contacting them for compensation and I've got none. Nonetheless, customer support at Moscow airport doesn't care. While people were rushing and had urgent questions, all 3 women at the counter just put a "break 15min" sign and left. I had a ticket back to Lithuania on June 6th from Tokyo, through Moscow. I knew that the flight will be canceled because Lithuania embassy information was 100% sure that borders will be closed for traveling from Moscow until July 1st. However, when I called airline, they said that it's not true, and they are not sure about that, I still canceled my flight, because I always buy flights with cancelation option. (Flight was officially canceled just a couple days before the departure). Their policy says that return takes around 10 working days. Its been a month and all they say is Wait. Even customer support on the phone is poorly mannered. I understand that this epidemic time is very bad for airlines, but it is not a customer problem.	0
I booked a flight for next week mistakenly I chose November instead December. Like every one I tried to change the flight both online and by calling. Online my experience was awkward , gives the option to change one way and not both! Phone call, number in Madrid is not working and voice message tells you that . Next level, contacting customer service by email imagine after explaining to them what I have done (online and calling) they have sent to me a link to change the flight which is the same in there official site which is not working and a call center number in Morocco. This is my first I have seen an airline who does not care at all with their clients. My last option is booking another flight but not anymore with your irresponsible Company Cheers	0
Do not take this airline. We had two small carry ons for our short flight from Marrakesh to Fez, but they would not allow us to take them. My friend had to check in his carry on. The reasoning? They claimed it was a full flight, but we knew that was untrue upon entering the airplane, the flight was only half full, and there was ample space for baggage in the overhead bins. The people who checking in before us didn’t have this issue. In fact, no one else was asked to do this except for my friend.  To top this experience off, our seating arrangement was not honored even though we paid extra to have specific seats next to each other. They were randomly assigned seats totally separate from each other. Luckily the flight was (contrary to airline staff) only half full, so we seated ourselves. When traveling within Morocco, take the train.	0
Purchased full fare economy refundable ticket and upgraded to business class using my SU Bonus miles. Flight was cancelled by Aeroflot. To date unable to get my refund despite numerous calls to Aeroflot call center. All they are trying to do is offer me to use a voucher despite my ticket fare being subject to a full refund. No timeframe given as to when the refund will be processed. In addition my upgrade miles are also not processed and returned to my account yet. Aeroflot has strict rules when you are buying and paying but they seem not liable to follow any binding rules with regards to refunds.	0
My co passenger was suffering from headache. From his frustration since inside flight i enquired about this. So he asked for one tablet just to survive the time of fight .. no one care of this. Then he requested again, the air hostess gave him one tablet, after he asked for water. The strange thing is that they asked him for money for water. Its so strange and disappointing situation. I am so annoyed how they may consider for passengers during emergency/ medical conditions.	0
It’s was one of the worst flight that I used, I made a online checkin and I selected a seat, which they changed it at the time of obtaining boarding pass without my consent, then the family next to me were cleaning and changing the kids diaper on the seat and didn’t consider the cabin crew instructions. The food was served after 2.5 hours to me and they didn’t accept the currency which from the flying location. Very bad service! Shouldn’t choose airlines who don’t care about their customers, even the tickets were costly.	0
I booked family ticket from Delhi to Abu Dhabi last year to travel in December. Unfortunately travel had to be cancelled. But came to know that they don't refund the money, but allow reuse the ticket within 1 year. Now came to know that they have stopped flights to Abu Dhabi. And there are number of restrictions to re use the ticket. I think Air Arabia is worst airline where rules are made to grab travelers money.	0
I was on a flight from Tangier to Amsterdam, the worst flight I have experienced. A passenger had a health issue and the aircraft had to stop in France for emergency. The flight was delayed by almost 2 hours. I missed my connecting flight, and I ended up booking a hotel stay and a new flight which has cost me an arm and a leg. I also had to re-schedule other travel activities which cost me a lot of money. In total the damage was over 1,200 EUR. I raised a complaint. I never heard from them, they did not even acknowledge receiving it. The form does even accept PDFs (how would you supplement a complete compensation claim!) I had similar problems in the past, once there was a half day delay! Once I sent a request for information and never got a reply! The flight was horrible!	0
Air Arabia reschedule my flight for 26th August instead of 25th for returning to London UK. Even they emailed me for information and issued an e-ticket. Eventually when I arrived at Kathmandu airport to fly to the UK. They couldn't find my schedule in the system. It was a blunder mistake from them. After carefully checking at Kathmandu airport then found out the airline cancelled my ticket without my authorization. Now I am still in Kathmandu n couldn't fly back and they don't refund me after their stupid mistake. Even I emailed them 10 times but not replied yet. This is their error and they should resolve it. Please be careful with this kind of airline. I don't want anyone to suffer like me. Customer satisfaction is the priority but they are after only money.	0
Flew Air Austral return Sydney to Mauritius. Male flight attendants on the flight to RUN - nice however food provided is limited and alcohol only during meal times. Water is in short supply and passengers at the back of the plane were forgotten about almost all the time and rationing of water became an issue towards the end of the journey. Passengers were made to stay overnight in RUN - hotel stay provided to some passengers were terrible no assistance from the airline or hotel and dinner not provided (incur at passenger's expense). Return flight home was canceled with no word to most passengers (only upon check-in). Flight was canceled due to poor maintenance of the plane which suffered system difficulties on it's previous long haul journey and was forced to attempt emergency landing 3 times - and we were going to take this plane home! Was put up again at the same terrible hotel for the night. Female flight attendants extremely rude impatient and unwilling to communicate to passengers who cannot speak fluently in French. Very disappointed in the service provided by Air Austral will not fly again.	0
Really atrocious service, both my flights in the same day were delayed with no solid updates on what is happening. The bus is late and thete are no staff at the gate to inform us what is happening. I personally need to get back to my home in Qatar quick and i do not appreciate all my flights being delayed by so long. Air Arabia really need to get their priorities straight and fix these constant delays. Really really bad. Worst airlines I've travelled on.	0
Worst airline for everything. Boarding late for more than 1 hour with no information for bus. Very bad attitude from the staff. Not recommended to anyone.	0
The journey was postponed three times, from July 17 to July 18 at eight in the morning, then we got an email by changing the date until six in the morning instead of eight in the morning, so I contacted customer service to make sure that it is a deadline ،because of my mother's health condition, and security problem in Sudan and difficulty of The movement in it and the closure of the roads leading to the airport, the customer service told me that another change will happen, and the flight will be at 6 pm instead of 6 am without any email or sms notification.	0
Air Botswana is consistent in letting down their passengers. My family and I have had 4 encounters with Air Botswana and we were let down 4 times. First my mother received an itinerary and a payment confirmation only to arrive at the airport to be told that her ticket was not issued and that she would have to purchase another. She complained about this and Air Botswana tried to calm the situation down stating that she will be reimbursed for the purchase. The second issue was that i had a connecting flight from Johannesburg to Gaborone with air Botswana. My initial flight was from Cape Town. 2hrs before my departure from Cape Town i get informed that the flight from Johannesburg to gabs was cancelled. I was forced to take the flight from Cape Town to Johannesburg but to purchase accommodation for the next day for when air Botswana could give me another flight. I was not reimbursed for the expenses incurred. The third issue is the same as the first which happened to my brother who experienced the same issue as my mother. The fourth issue occurred this morning when I arrived at the check im desk after having travelled 300km on road to get to Gaborone Airport I was inform that although I have a payment confirmation from DPO Pay, Air Botswana had still not received any reflected money in their account and thus would have to purchase another ticket from the ticket sales. This resulted in me having to pay all my travel money and borrowing some to purchase this ticket. I am a student and one can only imagine the difficulty this caused. Air Botswana is consistent in giving trouble and all 4 times my family and I have travelled with them we had problems. When you see this many negative reviews take heed.	0
We bought our Maun to Johannesburg in october. At this time the flight departure were at 1:50pm landing in Joburg at 4pm giving us 3h35 to catch our flight for Europe. 3 weeks before our departure I received a notification about this flight. It has been delayed to 3pm and will land in Joburg at 6pm. Leaving us with 1h35 to catch our flight in Joburg. Quite difficult to do but doable. I wrote to customer service to ask them if it will be ok to have such a short transit time in Joburg, but they never answered me. When we arrived in Maun, we told the Air Botswana representative that we had to register on our flight to Europe because we will not have time to do it. They told us that they will try to. 30 min before departure, we learned by Canadian tourists that the flight had been delayed to 5pm. We ask Air Botswana to book us on another flight for Europe. After long minutes on their back they told us that we were booked on Virgin Atlantic instead of Swiss. It was ok for us even if the transit time would be short (1h20). We only wanted to be in Paris the next morning, so making a stop in Zurich or London wasn't an issue for us. During the flight we asked flight attendants that we will have a short transit time in Joburg and to organize something to make sure we catch our virgin Atlantic flight. We had to ask twice because we made a stop in Gaborone and flight attendants changed. When we arrived a van was there to drive us to the virgin atlantic terminal. Everything seems fine right? Well when we wanted to check in on Virgin Atlantic, the attendants told us that my ticket could not be emitted, leaving my wife alone. No one at Air Botswana told us that there was a problem with the ticket. Due to their incompetence, we had to sleep at the airport hotel. No one form air Botswana helped us for the room booking, Bid airservices employees were the best, they did the hotel room booking for us on behalf of Air Botswana. The next day, we had to stand in front of Air Botswana counter from 10am to 3pm in order to have our ticket to Paris. The manager were unbearable and supercilious. They lied to us numerous time, we had to put pressure on them to have some information about the situation. Note that we booked the whole trip (Maun to Paris) they had to pay for the rest of our journey (air france ticket were 2500 $ per person in premium economy, economy was fully booked). We were with Canadian tourists who didn't book the whole trip and they had to buy again Johannesburg - Montreal ticket something like 3000 $. This was the worst travel experience of my life. And during Air Botswana flight you can't use your smartphone even if it's in airplane mode, and there is no entertainment proposed.	0
Seoul to Kuala Lumpur. When we arrived at the airport 90 min before departure time, the  counter was empty. Nobody up there and the automatic check-in was disabled. After walking all over to find their offices, we were greeted by an employee who told us they closed the counter 90 min prior to flight as a company policy. There was no effort on her part to open the door or offering any alternatives. I dislike that attitude in any kind of service.	0
Phuket to Oslo via Moscow. The crew on board were so unfriendly to me, and the ground crew were worse. I have never had such a negative experience with any airline. They were not lifting a finger to help me, even when the flight was delayed and security process on transit was so slow that we missed our flight. They had no procedure of how to take care of passengers that missed their connection flight, and we were stuck at Moscow airport with two toddlers. My advise is simply to stay away.	0
Amsterdam to Hanoi via Moscow. The airline staff weighed my suitcase and backpack and threatened to not be allowed to board for the reason that my laptop backpack was too bulky and my hand suitcase was 1kg more than the allowance, they said that the flight was full. I told him I checked in from Amsterdam and all my hand luggage was fine, what can I do now, can I pay for this. He literally shouted "You have 3 minutes to throw away your stuff now or you stay in Moscow tonight!".  I had to throw away some of my clothes, bag of cosmetics,  book, notebook, bag of socks from my hand luggage and backpack.  Then they finally let me pass, I went on to the plane and waited until everybody has boarded to see the whole plane was at least 20% empty seated? Their staff cannot treat its client this.	0
I had a bitter experience of flying with Air Arabia two times, they keep on rescheduling and they are not providing stay or food. Moreover there is no feedback tab in their website. Reply from customer call center and reply mail is a nightmare. There is no refund for the cancellation tickets too and I received damaged baggage one time too.	0
Bangalore to Doha via Sharjah. Worst airline, they charged us excess as we had 4 pieces of luggage instead of 2 pieces, totalling less than 60 kgs, as allowed for us (2 travellers). This is the first time an airline is charging extra for the number of pieces, as per our ticket we could carry 60 kgs, and our luggage was less than 60 kgs, still they made us pay at Bangalore airport. Staff were very arrogant, and uncooperative. This is the first and last time with Air Arabia.	0
Tel Aviv to Moscow. I ordered diabetic meal which was just not edible for me. when I tried to change the meal for the flight back they said its not possible because its 24 hours before the flight. I don't think 24 hours notification is unreasonable for changes about food.	0
Ho Chi Minh to Amsterdam via Moscow. We paid 100 euro more to select seats, with this I hoped that I would be able to book the extra leg space, I would not even mind to pay again a bit extra, this was not possible, we called with the airline and asked if they could book them for us. This was not possible, we should do this at the airport 24 hours before check in, we went to the airport to arrange this, this was not possible, we should do this in Moskou. There we had 1.5 hour transfer time. Next day we checked in and we will fix the extra leg space in Moskou, when we arrived in Moskou we had to wait in a line, because of a delay we had 45 minutes transfer time. At the transfer desk we tried to get the extra legspace.  During the flight there were many rows with the extra legspace free. I was not allowed to change seats. For the way back we managed it differently, we went again 24 hours before to the airport... no aeroflot desk.. For this flight back we managed it. With good mood at the gate the new hell starts .. 1 hour delay because of cleaning the plane and we had again 1.5 hours to transfer - arrived Moscow 35 mins late. hour long flight in stress because of the staff who can only say you go to transfer desk.	0
I just booked today and they charged me for insurance which I did not select. When I contacted them they mentioned that you cannot cancel -  you charge your customer for a service which I will not use. It's really disappointed experience, zero customer service.	0
Worst experience ever. The flight from New Delhi was cancelled just 48 hours advance. When contacted with the call center several times (almost whole day wasted)they offered an alternative flight from Chennai or Trivandrum instead of Delhi, saying both the cities were in India. Imagine, they want passengers to travel to South India first to reach UAE. Then when I explained the customer care representative that it was almost an impossible option he said only flight till Sharjah was available. I requested a transfer, even a shuttle, bus, taxi anything could do as unlike Air Arabia we cannot change our duty schedules at 48 hours notice. The option was out rightly rejected. When requested to reach the higher officials, even that was impossible.=	0
This was the most horrible flight in my life. It was a nightmare. I booked a flight from Bishkek to Riyadh through Sharjah with this airline. They boarded me on the flight to Sharjah without a problem but in Sharjah, they denied me. The reason they gave me was that I did not have a QR code on my vaccine certificate and I am required to present an institutional quarantine package booking which I didn't have. I had to spend two nights in this terrible cold dirty airport crying all the tears my body could ever produce. The Air Arabia staff treat people like sheep. I saw them being extremely rude and disrespectful to South Asians who were in the same situation as me. On the third day, they sent me back to Bishkek where I booked the institutional quarantine and bought another fright with Flydubai. Flydubai didn't even ask me for a QR code for my vaccine certificate. Moreover, when I arrived in Riyadh the customs officer did not require a QR code and told me I do not need to quarantine. Imagine my anxiety and despair caused by these incompetent Air Arabia staff. Never in my life, I am going to purchase anything from you.	0
Such a disgusting service. Never again. Was denied boarding for a flight from Casablanca to Basel on Dec 31 for no reason. The guy at check- in counter just said to me “you can’t get this flight without a transit visa”.  A connecting flight to my home country was departing from Basel in just 6 hours (24 hours visa-free transit is allowed in Switzerland for Russian nationals). I tried to claim compensation from the airline. They replied, but with “We don’t have any refund/cancellation policy”, didn’t even apologise.	0
My flight from Aktobe to Almaty was canceled. I had another flight to Phuket and then from Phuket to Sydney by another airline. Air Astana didn’t provide any option to get to Almaty, they only offered to return money or re-book to 3 weeks later. Call center couldn’t help. I bought by my own ticket to Almaty through Nur-Sultan and requested refund for this segment and compensation of my expenses for ticket I purchased by myself. I haven’t received yet any answer from them from July, 5, 2022.	0
Amsterdam to Hong Kong via Moscow. 13 days before my departure date, I got a message that my flight was canceled and an alternative flight was offered to me with a departure date which was 1 day earlier than my original flight. Although it was very inconvenient, I agreed on taking the alternative flight. Then 5 days before my flight, I got the message that my alternative flight was full and there was no other option then to cancel my booking with a refund. I was therefore forced to find an alternative flight myself within 5 days.  I did manage to find an alternative flight but it cost me way much more than what I originally booked.	0
Very pathetic service from Air Arabia. I wanted to change my meal preference. Tried changing online, but before it reach the final step, system encountered error. Tried multiple time and left with no other option other than calling customer service. Call got connected after 17 mins, and the lady kept me on hold for another 12 mins and she hanged up the call just like that. Again tried calling them back, waited for 15 mins to get the call connected. Even this time, the lady kept me on hold for more than 13 mins and came back telling that I need to pay additional. (The amount initially paid was matching with the selected meal). She told this cannot be done.. I would give Minus star for Air Arabia service.. Very unprofessional company.	0
Total unprofessional services from Air Arabia. Zero care for passengers.  Flight got postponed for 24 hrs and Air Arabia doesn’t have any courtesy to update the reason for the change or provide any compensation or not even reasonable discussions (Only response provided is the flight changes are beyond their limit). If it is few hrs we can understand. But how can an airline justify change in flight timing for 24 hrs. I booked premium seats by paying additional amount. And when the flight got changed the new itinerary received removed seat booking just like that and they adjusted the amount as credit. If there is any change in original commitment, being an airline company, it is Air Arabia's responsibility to call customer and inform about the change or removal of some service. Rather they expected customer call them back and the worst part is no one answers the call for more than 40 mins in 2 instances. I would rate less than single star for Air Arabia service. First impression with Air Arabia in overall dealing with customer is much below any acceptable quality standards.	0
The worst experience, I have traveled from Sharjah to Kyiv for big celebration the flight was delayed plus i was waiting for the luggage which they told us after one one didn’t come and will be tomorrow as of overweight, i had one kg extra which paid at the airport. When I asked if they will deliver luggage home they said i have to come to the airport again. Very bad experience.	0
Maun to Johannesburg. What a terrible experience. The plane was in disarray & dirty. The cabin staff were dishevelled & not serious. I will never fly Air Botswana again!	0
Poor service with customers. I booked 2 tickets in February and March. The company canceled the flights and sent emails automatically. No clear information or explanation. I tried many times to contact the call-center of the air company to get more information about the flight and discuss the schedule, but no answer. I sent an email immediately but replied after 2 months without detailed information. I have been waiting for a refund for 3 months. This is my first time to face such as poor service and no respect for customers.	0
Moscow to Los Angeles. The airline did not allow me to select seats for my upcoming flight, but offers an option to reserve 24 hours in advance. I was flying with a family member who was able to select their seat without a problem. When it was my turn to do the same (we did it at the same time from the same computer) the system would not allow me to do it. After checking the info we decided to call their customer service. The associate  did not offer help. After admitting that all of our info is entered correctly, they told us that we need to use a different version of their software.  No resolution was offered, myself and my family member flew in different ends of the plane.	0
Horrible company. We had the worst experience ever traveling with this airline. They didn’t let us get in inside our flight even we are vaccinated and we have all our documents in law. They didn’t know the rules to get in at Egypt, even with the official website of the Egyptian government says clearly that people with the vaccine can go to Egypt for holiday. We were vaccinated in the United States but they didn’t understand that our vaccine is the same as in Europe and they didn’t let us to take the flight. Horrible attitude from the Italian supervisor and the guy from the counter. This supervisor didn’t speak a proper English and he didn’t help us in nothing. We showed up him the official information from the Egyptian government but he didn’t understand that he was totally wrong with his decision. I don’t recommend flying with Air Arabia airlines. They do the impossible for the customers don’t have a nice time flying with them and they don’t give you proper answers. It look like the people in the counter l don’t even know what they’re doing, besides a horrible attention. The supervisor was even worst. They are not prepared at all. My worst experience flying and I’ve been in more than 55 countries. I hope this situation helps to save you a lot of problems with this airline.	0
I am passenger of Muscat to Calicut on 19th September. I have lost my backpack luggage weighting 10kg. As per the request, It was handed over to airlines staff while boarding to flight in Muscat. As they informed i would get the baggage in luggage section. But unfortunately i didn't receive hand bag with my other luggage. There after reached at the destination i complained in the aiport (Air Arabia office). A week passed, no one turned to me with registered complaint. While i called customer care number they were unaware about luggage lost procedure. After connecting then 3 times they shared some contact numbers, which never answered and invalid.	0
I booked a flight with them from Doha to Baku for Sep 17, flight was supposed to leave 09:30 and arrive at Sharjah at 11:30am to connect for the flight to Baku at 13:00 and arrive there at 15:55. They sent me an email at 21:00 the night before( keep in mind my flight at this point is in less then 12 hours) saying that they have changed the flight and I should go online and either cancel or accept the new flight. Here is the catch. The new flight they purposed was leaving Doha on Sep 17 at 18:30 and arriving at Sharjah at 20:30 with a 4 day layover and not leaving for Baku until Sep 21. Naturally this is absolutely ridiculous and I cancelled the flight after which they refused to reimburse me. You see they put you in a situation that you can not accept the terms and at the end stiff you out of your money.	0
My flight was canceled and I don't need any credit voucher, I'd rather prefer the amount transferred to my bank account. But they say it's not possible. What am I supposed to do with the voucher if I don't need to travel with them in the next year?  It's even more unrespectful and ridiculous that they reply with a copy-paste of the previous email and don't have the time to answer their unsatisfied customer.  Really bad experience.	0
I had booked with this airline in Feb 2020 before COVID19 hit the whole world. Australia had borders shut since March 2020 till now still closed with no opening date set. My "fully flexible" ticket that was paid at an extra cost, all meals and including luggage for 3 people, A$1,787.11 charged has now been taken from me from this airline with ZERO in return. Travel was booked for August 2020 and they refused a refund. They gave us a credit after countless emails with a expiry date that meant i could not book because we are still within travel restrictions, there is no reasoning with this airline. All i asked for was an extension of the expiry date to allow us to book once borders are open and they declined... over and over again i asked and escalated the matter to their complaints team and they all declined. All other flights were refunded for the family and friends we were traveling with but they booked with ryannair and Iberia and both airlines provided a refunded in full no questions or hassles.	0
London to Nur-Sultan in August 2019. Awful experience. They used to be good but not anymore. I often fly from London to Almaty using Air Astana. The check in company ASC at Heathrow Terminal 4 used by Air Astana are rude and not friendly at all.	0
Aeromexico changed my flight twice before our scheduled departure date and our outgoing flight turned out to be an overnight layover. They offered no hotel accommodations and wanted to send my luggage to the final destination. After 2.5 hours of waiting at our 1st arrival, we recovered our luggage so we can wash up before our next flight. Again, no accommodations were given or food vouchers. Our flight going home, same thing - 7 hour layover and no food vouchers to eat while waiting at the airport. We were forced to buy the overpriced food at the airport both times. We lost 2 days of vacation because Aeromexico changed our flight! Also, the WiFi did not work on the flight home and the plane was much smaller, making it a very long and uncomfortable ride after waiting 7 hours at the airport. Do not fly with Aeromexico. They do not care about their passengers. They want to squeeze as many people into 1 plane as possible, even if it means changing your schedule.	0
Worst Mexican airline I have ever traveled. I bought my tickets 8 months before and they overbook the flight and we couldn’t board that airplane after waiting 4 hours or more in the airport with two little girls that were tired and starving. Plus the time dealing with them to give us another option to flight to Los Ángeles, at least they pay the hotel and meals for us for one night. The next day the flight with a delay of 2 hours. Horrible service, we will never travel through Aeromexico never again.	0
Ho Chi Minh City to Verona via Moscow. I have been charged at the airport 200 euros for a 23 kg piece of luggage. I paid for extra pieces 400 euros total. Not happy about that, the awful personnel at Ho Chi Minh City airport wanted to charge me 200 euros for my carry on luggage because it was 2 centimers too big. Never again Aeroflot, change gear Saigon.	0
On our first flight from Brussels to Casablanca on Friday 27 November everything went excellent. We had registered our self for the flight and received the boarding cards and delivered our baggage at the airport. We have registered with our valid Moroccan passport and our valid resident cards they were accepted without any issues at all. We did not get any further notification from the registering team that the same documentation will be refused during the back-flight... On 13 December we had our flight back from Casablanca to Brussels. We had the flight at 07.10 in the morning we were at 03.30 in the morning in the airport. We have waited until the gates were opened to deliver our baggage and register for our boarding cards, however when we wanted to pass to the gates office to weight our baggage we were intercepted by two Air Arabia agents (one was the responsible of the flight that day and the other was controlling the documents). They refused to let us go to the gates office to deliver our baggage and they stated that our documents were not legal, the same documents that we have used to register in Brussels, our Moroccan valid passport and valid permanent residents cards. We have even double nationality, as we have the Moroccan and the Dutch nationality. When we tried to explain our case to the agents, they became aggressive and started to insult my wife in front of all passengers present in the hall. I went to the Air Arabia office in the floor below but the offices were closed. The agents kept on refusing letting us pass to get our boarding pass while we had a valid ticket and valid documentation, the same documentation that we have registered and used from Brussels to Casablanca. If the documentation was to be refused, then we should be notified in Brussels before even boarding to Casablanca... but that was not the case. The agents were executing police task by refusing us to board, I have registered a complaint at the police office in the airport and the police has confirmed to us that the agents do not have the legal rights to hold us from passing as our documents are valid. If someone should prevent us from passing that should be only the police that has right to. The agents were becoming more aggressive, the responsible as insulted my wife and shouted to her and after went away without giving any sign of presence, time went by and the gates have been closed and the time of flight has arrived (7.10), I could go through and escalate the problem and even prohibit the flight, but because my wife is a heart patient I didn’t want to escalate. My wife became unwell and had problems with breathing due to the stress caused by the agents, I have called for the airport doctor and we have waited for him in the cafeteria. When he came she was already better, he has examined her and confirmed she might flight back to Belgium. I have bought new tickets with Royal Air Maroc to Amsterdam as there were no tickets still to Belgium and we had to take the next flight and could not stay longer because I had to go to work next day. At the gates of the flight of Royal air Maroc, that was going to Brussels at the same time (12.30) I have presented the same documentation to the flight responsible and asked if the documents were OK to go to Brussels and she had confirmed it, when I said that the agents of Air Arabia have refused to let us pass she confirmed that it is ridiculous and there was no reason for that and that	0
Sharjah to Beirut. Bad customer service, hidden fees, you end up with headache and extra cost. Add to this the fact they fly from or through Sharjah airport, where passengers are treated poorly.	0
I bought a ticket with Air Arabia in March for a vacation in Morocco. Because of COVID the flight got cancelled. I requested a cash refund but their call center charges crazy amounts. I sent numerous emails to their customer service only to receive standard reply messages. I did not give up and after some time their customer service center finally answered my messages only to let me know that Air Arabia's policy is not to offer a cash refund for COVID-cancelled flights. They said they only hand out a voucher that has to be used within 1 year. Since we couldn't go on vacation, this is completely of no use to me. Moreover, travel to Morocco is currently forbidden by Belgium. EU regulations clearly state that they are obliged to offer EU passengers the choice of a cash refund, but they seem not to care at all about passenger rights. This is the last time ever I travelled with Air Arabia, and I strongly advise anyone to not do business with this company.	0
No refund policy and call center 1€/minute even if line busy. My flight was canceled in March due to Covid-19 and they offer me a ticket valid one year that I cannot use because Morocco has been closed for the last 6 months and no sign of near reopening. I explained that I cannot use their ticket because we can't fly to Morocco and they keep sending the same email with the voucher valid one year (now 6 months) and if you call them you never get to speak to someone but I received a 30€ phone bill for the call.	0
Tashkent to London via Almaty / Astana.  Air Astana customer service is horrendous, especially if you’re stranded at an airport trying to get home. On my 7-hour flight, there was no inflight entertainment or USB charging points. I’m on the verge of tears midway through a journey from Tashkent to London via Almaty and Astana. My flight from Astana to London has been delayed, which happens. It’s not the first time and won’t be the last. Air Astana’s handling of the delay has bee utterly abysmal and frankly negligent. I was at the airport 1.5 hours before my flight was due to leave as I was transferring from Almaty. I had no notification or text message, I just found out when I wanted to make my way to the gate! I tried to find some staff, no one was around to ask questions. I went to the business lounge, who rang someone and said “they’re coming”. A whole 40 mins later, no one came. I went to one of the gates to ask staff there. They asked if I was on the Dubai flight. When I said no, they walked off. At this point I didn’t know whether my flight was cancelled, delayed or what time it was due to London. I eventually found a desk in the corner of the terminal and they advised me to go upstairs to get some food and water. They had no vegetarian options at all and tiny cups of water. I’ve been travelling for 20 hours at this point and still don’t know when I’m going to get home ... but at least I have a drop of water to keep me going.. Do yourself a favour and book any other airline.	0
Beijing to Almaty. Airline billed me R1800 for my hand luggage bag, while was within its weight limit. According to their statement hand luggage and a laptop bag is 2 items, hence the reason I needed to check in my hand luggage, knowing only on bag is allowed. They than ask me to pay via my debit card. We were a team and I was asked to pay, my team was allowed to take hand luggage and a laptop bag. I demand my money to be refunded.	0
Moscow to Shymkent via Almaty. For foreign passengers buying Air Astana's tickets through travel websites such as Expedia or Priceline, beware of tactics in getting people to buy their low priced tickets, only to find out the 'Economy Class with one piece of checked luggage included' actually means only 1 kg of checked luggage, which is less than the weight of most suitcases! On their website, the baggage policy for Economy class is stated as 20 kilos, with no mention of a 1 kilo policy. We flew from Moscow to Shymkent and even though our confirmation page clearly stated we are economy passengers with 1 piece of luggage included, we were forced to pay for excess luggage because their system showed we are not allowed checked luggage. We complained to the supervisor in charge of Air Astana check in desk at Moscow SVO airport but she was rude and unhelpful. She was basically saying 'I don't care what your Confirmation Page says. We go by our system so either pay or don't fly!' We have since complained to Air Astana and asked for a refund, but no reply yet. Beware!	0
First and foremost, why do I pay for seats and not receive them, it's a waste of my monies to pay for a service and not receive what I've paid for. I've been on this airline 4 times in 2 years and it still the same bad service and not getting what I paid for. The aero app is useless, never works and never has my downloaded pass, I go from second class row 5 to the back of the plane - stealing money they are. Parent Delta is just as bad, same as above, then they act as if it's all new to them and never heard of issues. Also unless you apply for credit card you get no skylines, I've been four times and haven't received.	0
I’ve flown with Aeromexico before and had a great experience which is why I felt confident in inviting first time flyers. I cannot stress how disorganized, unprofessional and non accommodating our experience was. We planned a month in advance, bought out tickets, rented a car and airbnb and all fell through because this airline decided to give our seats to other people and we were only 5 amongst 20 other people experiencing this problem. The employees there to assist ended up crying and screaming on how overworked they were while we had to wait for a 7 hour delay. Everyone had a stressful day and it’s understandable that things may go wrong but the level of disregard to the guest was shocking. Never again will we fly Aeromexico ever again.	0
I missed my connecting flight to Istanbul on sept 6th after a delayed flight from Los Angeles. I arrived at the boarding gate 21 minutes before departure time after a long security and passport control line but I was denied for boarding because the gate was already closed. The staff at the boarding gate was very unfriendly and did not help me and 5 other people who missed the same flight. All of us went to the ticket office and were forced to buy a new ticket. The penalty payment wasn’t even accepted and I had to pay additional 15157 Russian Rubel for the new boarding pass.  They told me that I can only complain on the website and request my money back. When I arrived in Istanbul, my luggage had been left in Moscow. Their only job was to get me into this connecting flight without additional fees and also not to leave my luggage in Moscow, but they did - my luggage finally arrived 2 days later in the evening. My porcelain vaze from Fort Lauderdale/America was broken and cost me about 152$. This trip with Aeroflot was a huge mistake and also a big disappointment.	0
Jouf to Nairobi via SharjahI booked the flight for my girlfriend, was cancelled by airline and 3 months later didn't get no response whatsoever. No one is answering their phones, no e-mails, nothing, they just took my money and went quiet into the dark.	0
My flight has been cancelled due to COVID-19 regulations. I insured the flight beforehand and asked for a refund. I received three blank, copy-pasted emails where it was clear nobody reads my requests, telling me I will get a travel voucher. After threatening the company with legal action, they agreed to pay me my money back within 90 days. 90 days (a long while, isn't it!) passed a week ago and my refund is nowhere to be seen.	0
I'm reviewing on behalf of my friend who I was with through all the stress and money lost by dealing with Air Arabia. In all my years in the travel business I am shocked at the unprofessionalism and sheer lack of empathy for passenger. Their condition of contract and other important information is non existent. My friends arrived through Milan to Cairo on 3rd July. It should have been from Naples but Air Arabia cancelled. Email arrived telling them their flight for their departure was cancelled out of Sharm El Sheikh on the 31st July. Air Arabia offered to go back on the 17th August. Nobody in Sharjah contacted them. My question was how were my friends to survive for 17 days. Another email canceling the flight on the 17th August. Rang Sharm airport who advised that there were no flights coming in from air arabia at all. So looks like they sold the seats knowing they wouldn't be flying in or out of Sharm. My friends had to buy 2 tickets with Egyptair yesterday to get to Cairo to catch a flight. They have to stay in a hotel for 2 nights in Cairo, I had to lend them 2000 egyptian pounds. Through all this their visas had run out and on arrival today in Cairo they were told they would have to pay for the visa being out of date. Air Arabia had the cheek to charge them for the seat increases on the two cancelled flights. This is not a covid problem, this is disgraceful. I live in Egypt and I know AA are based in Sharjah but their agents in Cairo couldn't care less. I'm disgusted at the behavior.	0
Had a ticket booked this summer of July 18th 2020. Used this airline for over 10 years only to find out that I dont have a choice but the travel to Morocco instead of postponing until next summer due to uncertainties in regards to corona virus restrictions in Morocco. Company made it clear it was all about their terms and condition and showed no compassion towards me or my family situation. Highly recommended to avoid this joke of a company due lack of understanding for their customers. Furthermore, I ultimately choose to stay behind to be safe than sorry. Paid over £1200 and thats now down the drain. In reality, they only care about the money at the end of the day. Will never use again!	0
Marrakech to London. I was denied boarding (despite being at the checking counter with my family well before checkin closing) because of overbooking on the flight to Gatwick at Marrakech Airport on 23/2/2020. The Swissport staff were rude and extremely unhelpful and just informed that there are only 3 spaces on the flight for the 4 of us- we were made to run around without any solution provided. The gentleman at the ticketing counter asked us to talk to the supervisor - who we had to find by asking around 5 other agents - The supervisor offered to rebook us on a flight 3 days later, without any accommodation or compensation (for something that was clearly Air Arabia issue - overbooking) which was not acceptable to us. Finally I bought myself a ticket on another airline and came home while my family members went in the scheduled flight. No replies from customer care email for 8 days now. The checkin agents on the ground were extremely rude and focussed on shifting the blame on the passengers rather than finding a solution. Air Arabia business model seems to hinge on overbooking and leaving passengers without any recourse - their business model seems to be lying and cheating. I would give negative overall rating if I could.	0
Almaty to Dushanbe with Air Astana. Forced me off my flight during check in (plane was not cancelled, it was overbooked) even though I booked 3 months in advance. Staff said this happens everyday and could provide no help. They suggested I contact their office who has not responded to my questions. Staff even asked me to please complain because this happens so often and they are clearly sick of it. To avoid this problem for others, I would recommend not using this airline as they were extremely unprofessional and no one could answer my questions. I travel every month to many countries across Asia and have never been treated so poorly. Later, Air Astana replied to my compliant with A) Wrong flight/date, and B) blamed it on a travel agent (I didn't use a travel agent) and C) stated an email notification was sent when it was not. The fact that they will lie to invalidate my legitimate complaints shows the type of business they do.	0
I will never fly on this Airline again. From the terminal at AAA, and the entire flight reeked of Incompetence. Terminal 3 is a joke, similar to small airlines like Air Tobago. There were many Mexicans flying to Canada, and having them fill out their immigrations forms, was done one at a time, not in a bunch explaining. 40% of the AC/USB hubs in this disgusting terminal are DOA. Finding a vacant one is like looking for an oasis in the Sahara. Then the flight: I've never had Flight Attendants who were surly, but several of the FA's on Flight 616 were nasty. I have flown on almost every carrier in N. America, but have never been told that the washroom at the front of the plane was for First Class Only. So the rest of the plane, had two use 2 washrooms, with broken fixtures. No toilet paper, no paper towels, no soap. I was served a salmon pastry, when I told them I have a seafood allergy, they snarled at me to be quiet.	0
My brother and I traveled for a music festival. One of Our flights were delayed, which caused one of our luggage to be left in the states couldn’t get a hold of customer service so we had to get an Uber back to the the airport which was over an hour away. We had 4 luggage and all four TSA approved locks were broken open and to our luggage is damaged. We had to replace one going to replace. Total cash value was USD$ 760 After 7 months I was only refund $ 203.81. Avoid the hassle and fly with someone else!	0
Charged for an incorrect booking/flight. I was in Mexico City airport at the ticketing counter. I asked for the earliest return flight to Phoenix. The man asked for my card and charged my card, then gave me the ticket. I asked why the destination was Houston TX and not Phoenix. I proceeded to ask for a refund or to have my flight changed. He said he could change the flight, after about an hour of waiting he now says that the flight cannot be changed and I cannot have a refund. I went over to volaris and bought a return ticket without issue. I cant believe these people can get away with scamming their customers. I contacted customer service but after months of the run around this is the message I'm finally sent "I am sorry to inform you, I wasn't able to complete your request due to the fare purchased is not refundable and any clarification of purchase made directly at the airport has to be completed there. I apologize for the inconvenient, It was an honor to assist you. Cordially, Customer Care Representative" Never do business with this scam company.	0
I’ve had two flights with Aeromexico and both times: Despite being told I would receive wheelchair assistance: none was provided. Nor was any accessibility assistance provided unless I went over their head and contacted the airport or the other airline I was flying with. On this last flight, my hip partially dislocated due to all the strain of managing things myself — something that I was trying to avoid. I’ve encountered issues before as someone who only needs mobility assistance in certain circumstances, but I have never encountered this level of ableism or neglect while flying. Flights were delayed by more than an hour. On the return flight this resulted in me and my companion missing two connections and having to travel an extended route to return home. Despite requests when booking, checking in, and at the counter, they were “unable” to seat me next to my travel companion even when we had more expensive seats and were willing to downgrade. Customer service hung up on me twice and chats failed for hours until I was finally directed to someone who instantly disconnected when I informed them of the gravity of the situation. They have refused to talk to me on both Facebook messenger or WhatsApp (they use both services for chat messaging) and their phone lines either don’t answer or I get hung up on. If you have any kind of disability or impairment, please avoid this airline at all costs.	0
Check-in uneventful. Boarding a zoo with a rude employee denying me boarding, claiming some zone story.  Upon boarding I found a number of passengers that were probably the right 'zone' since they were seated in the rear already. An old ATR POS that Aegean must likely keep to connect some small islands that cannot accommodate jets. Why they would use these consistently for the third largest Greek island is unclear to me. Once seated in 15C and having put my backpack above, I see the flight attendant pushing it to make space for someone's big suitcase. When I objected, she pulled it down and told me in the rudest way to put it under the seat in front of me. Said attendant did not wear a name tag.	0
Worst airline experience I've ever had. Ruined my last day in Egypt. Spent a total of 10 hours in airport due to delays then when arrived in Cairo baggage was also delayed.  Aircraft dirty seats uncomfortable. I booked a tour and this was the flight they sent me on. Never book with this airline. It will ruin your holiday.	0
Flight from Cairo to Hurghada was cancelled and they sent me an email at 10:00 pm,  8 hours before the flight time and what I didn’t realize that they also changed the airline to Egyptair. So it’s not the same terminal in Cairo, Terminal 3 instead of terminal which is 18 minutes by car. So I didn’t catch the flight and had to buy a new one way ticket for a flight after 3.5 hour! So after checking in to Hurghada airport for the return flight & everything was fine until the flight is delayed for 19:00 instead of 17:30 and my original booking was for 14:00 but they sent me an email 4 days ago that this flight is cancelled &amp. They chose to give me the sm 63 flight at 17:30. Conclusion: If you have any work on the day of the flight with this airline company be sure that you will not reach on time. Or maybe you will not reach the same day.	0
Washington to Minsk via Moscow. As American citizens, you don’t need a visa to go to Belarus except if you fly to or from Russia. So we get to the airport, they tell us you can’t go. They didn’t want to help, rebook, provided no solutions. After 3 hours on the phone with the customer service, we rebooked and paid the change fees. Spend tons of money to get Russian and Belarus visa and fly out 2 weeks later. On the way back, the flight was delayed from Minsk to Moscow  which made us miss the connecting flight. they provided no solution to how we can get back home. Finally after fighting, they able to put us on a flight to miami. We had to pay extra for that as well and then we had to pay ourselves to go from Miami to dc. The experience was just unbelievable, never have we had such an atrocious experience and been treated the way we were.	0
On the return trip from Marrakech to London, I was denied boarding (despite being at the checking counter with my family well before closing) because of overbooking on flight 3O105 at Marrakech Airport on 23/2/2020. The Swissport staff were rude and extremely unhelpful and just informed that there are only 3 spaces on the flight for the 4 of us- we were made to run around without any solution provided. The gentleman at the ticketing counter asked us to talk to the supervisor - who we had to find by asking around 5 other agents - finally, we were offered a rebook on a flight 3 days later but without any accomodation or compensation (for something that was clearly AirArabia issue - overbooking) which was not acceptable to us. Finally, I managed to sort out my own tickets on another airline spending own money despite having a confirmed ticket for which I paid full fare with Air Arabia.	0
Chennai to Salalah via Sharjah. Worst airline ever travelled, flight delayed by half an hour in Chennai because of that I lost my connection flight to Salalah. Had to wait 10 hours for next connecting flight, didn't even provided a provision stay. This is second time it happened like this with this airline. I'll never use this airline again.	0
Cairo to Sharjah was delayed more than an hour. From Sharjah to Dhaka was delayed more than an hour too. No internet, no screen in front. There was food services from Cairo to Sharjah but no food from Sharjah to Dhaka (almost 5 hours), food had to be purchased by cash UAE dirhams. Very rude ground staff in Cairo, Sharjah, Dhaka. They do not consider that everyone pays for his/her own trip, so every passenger must be a valued customer for the airline. I will never travel Air Arabia next time for sure.	0
Pathetic service. I was travelling from Riyadh to Sialkot via Sharjah. The first flight was good but the flight from Sharjah to Sialkot was changed at the time of issuing boarding pass and without any prior notification. Total 13 hours extra was spend to at Sharjah airport.	0
Attitude is terrible, not only on board services, my luggage was damaged and there are few holes on my backpack and the staff at baggage claim asked us to find the on duty supervisor. The female supervisor was annoying when reached to us and ask "who asked you to find me"? She found some staff to do the baggage claim application but returned around 5 minutes later and just irritating us by poor attitude saying ‘actually these are ONLY VERY minor damage compared to others damaged luggage, it is not totally tear apart you cannot use it.’ What kind of service is this?	0
Premier class or whatever they call it is a complete waste. They give you the same uncomfortable seats and only put a bulky divider in the middle seat that they won’t allow you to remove. Especially if traveling as a couple it’s better just to have economy and sit next to each other.	0
My family planned a trip to Oaxaca end of October, flight was delayed 4 hours caused by the mechanics of the plane. The delay caused us to miss our connecting flight in Mexico City. They then had no flights for more than a week that they could get us on. They'd take us to Mexico City and no guarantee they'd be able to get us to our destination! They wouldn't give us a refund at the airport, told us we needed to call the customer service! So I have, 3 times! Each time they tell me they can't help and for me to email. That I can only get a refund if I email. I've emailed 3 times since October and never get a return email. Don't fly Aeromexico. They don't value customer service or their commitment to get you where you paid them to take you! Just disgusting service!	0
Terrible experience with Aeromexico in Mexico City, flight number AM 378, on December 28, 2022. First of all they don’t even board by zones, and second thing I was on zone 3 along side with my wife I paid for the seats I was in. I wasn’t even ask to gate check my bag and one of the staff member just pulled me aside and took my bag without asking what zone I was in and than proceed to throw the tag at me, really bad experience with Aeroméxico will not recommend.	0
This was my first time flying with Aegean, and my experience was anything but pleasant. Starting from when I checked-in at the counter, I have an SA Gold member where I get 20kg of free luggage, but the staff there says I have to pay another 45 Eur even though it should be free, and I explained that I have SA Gold and it should be free because I had a return ticket and I got 20kg free but the staff didn't care but tore the baggage tag in front of me and told me to go to the ticket agent at the airport, luckily the agent helped me a little bit to help me input manually, even though my status was still valid instead will be extended until next year. The second problem was when I was about to board in Athens, when it was my turn they stopped me and asked for a Moroccan visa or residence permit, I said my passport didn't need a visa to Morocco for up to 3 months and I even gave him a look at the Moroccan visa policy and he really didn't care.	0
The flight I was on for returning to Athens on 15 March was cancelled. We were informed this was due to weather. Passengers were told initially that the flight was delayed by 30 minutes, then another delay announcement just as passengers were getting emails informing of flight cancellation. The ground crew were poor at making sure there was clarity in their announcements. I went up to a staff member when most people who appeared to be Corfu residents had just gone home, and asked was there any hotel booking arrangements - "No", any hotel used in such circumstances, don't know, any cost max, don't know, what about meals, don't know. Reclaiming? - "you have to go to Aegean office in Athens". I spoke to a British Corfu resident who said most expensive hotel open was Corfu Palace. I chose to go somewhere with a little better location and not so expensive. I then found out from the lady that just after I left, she was told that anyone needing a hotel could go to the Corfu Palace and all meals etc were covered and no need to pay. So, overall great experience - really well done ground crew: vital information not provided on a timely basi. The later flight was full as the following day was a general strike in Greece - so 2 nights had to stay in Corfu. On return flight cabin crew tolfd me there was no issue with the weather, the aircraft had a fault that could not be fixed in Corfu. Aegean states 10 days to get back to passenger with complaint, it is now 19 days.  It is now 19 days and not a word from Aegean. This was my 3rd flight with Aegean. Their aircraft seem better than Sky Express their competitor, but my experience has really turned me off Aegean.	0
I will forever regret not treating the bad reviews seriously before traveling with Air Cairo. Their flight from Hurghada to Prague turned out to be by far the worst traveling experience of my life. First problems arose when we were notified in Hurghada that our flight was delayed by five hours. I discovered on flightradar24.com that the reason for the delay was the plane having been diverted to Skopje on a flight from Hurghada to Belgrade earlier that day. This was our first warning sign, foreshadowing what was to come next. When we finally took off and headed to Prague, the captain announced that our flight was diverted to Leipzig, Germany due to "bad weather" in Prague. The crew also told us that no planes were allowed to land in Prague for this reason whatsoever. When we confronted them with the fact that we were the only plane being diverted, they suddenly changed their story and claimed that our aircraft was not suitable for landing in low visibility. When we proved this to be a lie as well, they changed their story once more and told us that the pilots were inexperienced and therefore not trained for landing in foggy weather. What the real reason for the diversion was and how their side of the story would have developed had we pushed on them further, I have no idea. When we were finally allowed to leave the aircraft in Leipzig, we received no information about future plans whatsoever and the crew simply went to bed. The staff at Leipzig Airport were unable to help us either since the only people who knew at least something about our situation were asleep. At least that is what they said. Furthermore, they denied us access to our check-in luggage in spite of some passengers being in urgent need of their medication. On the plus side, Leipzig Airport provided us with beds and blankets to survive the night, for which we were thankful. Air Cairo, on the other hand, did nothing. The following morning was a disaster as well. A substitute flight from Leipzig to Prague was scheduled first for 5:30am, then for 11:00am. However, we still had no specific information as the airport staff was unable to reach the crew and the management of Air Cairo refused to communicate with us. The airport staff claimed that the only thing for which we were waiting was the crew, who were asleep at the hotel. Yet when the management of Air Cairo finally started answering our questions, they told us that the crew were already waiting at the hotel in their uniforms, not knowing themselves why they were not able to fly. What was the reason for the waiting, then? Were we waiting for the fog in Prague to disappear? We had no idea because no one bothered to tell us. After many hours of stressful waiting, during which we were again given misinformation multiple times and several passengers burst into tears, the crew finally arrived with no further explanation at 12:45pm and we took off at 1:30pm. To sum up, our landing in Prague was delayed by 20 hours. There are, however, two aspects of our situation that are most annoying. Firstly, it was argued that our issues were caused by fog. Yet we were the only plane on that day which had this problem and dozens of other aircraft were perfectly capable of taking off and landing in Prague. The problem was therefore clearly on the side of the airline and their pilots. And secondly, what I consider even more disgraceful was the arrogance with which the airline treated us and all their deception, lies and lack of communication.	0
The worst service ever. After I paid for my tickets on their official website I got shocked in the airport that they didn't list my name in the list of passengers nor 10 other passengers. While the economy seats were all booked by other passengers already. Moreover they refused to upgrade our seats to business class although it was available and we didn't catch the flight. After many calls the company finally told me to go to another terminal to catch another flight after 4 hours of my original booking. Very unprofessional.	0
I am flying in May, but after dealing with the airline I have great doubts about it. First off the online booking is a joke because they do not update their fares so by the time (5 minutes) you try to pay...you are unable to. Then you try to do it via the phone and all you get are non native English speaking "service reps", who can not understand you and you can't understand them (FYI I flew as a second office on a regional so I know my diction is good). I am fully expecting the same on the flight.	0
cAircraft wouldn’t start at Gatwick resulting in a two hour delay and missing my connection to Orlando. I was then rerouted via JFK which was also 2hrs behind getting me into my hotel at 02:30 instead of 9pm. On the return trip from Orlando to Heathrow via Dublin again the flight was 2hrs late resulting in a missed connection again and a late arrival into LHR. I paid extra for legroom and window seating which I lost on two legs. When I asked about the seats they said send an email!! Their check in staff at Orlando spent more time on their cell phones than dealing with customers. Even though the lines were long they didn’t care. No value in this airline at all don’t waste your money.	0
Absolutely shocking service. If I ran my company the way they did, I’d be out of business. Our flight was due to leave at 18.05, they waited until 18.25 to say the flight was cancelled and couldn’t get us on another flight until the following day. We were then told to head back to baggage collection to collect our cases, and proceed to check-in to arrange the hotel. This would have been straightforward if they hadn’t made us wait 2.5 hours to get our bags back. We then had to make our way to the hotel, most of that was guess work, only to find out our so called food voucher wasn’t available for use in any of the hotel restaurants. They tried to palm us off with either fish or curry in a separate room and it wasn’t being served until after 21:30. Travelling with children, this really isn’t a fair deal. We were then informed we had been transferred onto the 06:30 flight the following morning, I mean come on, not eating until after 21:30 with children, then trying to sort cases etc and be up for 03:30 the following morning to make the flight, absolute joke! To make things even more hilarious, my friend was travelling on the Aer Lingus flight to Glasgow around the same time we were due to fly, they were 20 mins from landing and they turned back due to a technical fault. So travelling back 40 minutes was safer than the 20 mins to Glasgow!! Clearly they don’t want to have a plane stranded in Glasgow, as it would cost more than the inconvenience to the full flight of passengers.	0
Oslo to Bangkok via Moscow. Due to problems at the airport, we did not pass our flight on, and had to pay 550 Euro for a new flight that departed 24 hours after the original flight. We could not get out of the airport without paying 150 Euro for visas due Norwegian passports.  A lot of other passengers had the same problem and there was a very long queue where you had to stand for about 90 - 120 minutes before getting help since they had only had two people for this. When you arrive at Moscow airport the staff are on their cell phones rather than coming up with menus when you sit down at the restaurants, they do not smile at all and show that they are not interested in providing good customer care. This is my first time in Russia, and I hope I don't have to come back any time soon. HR	0
Cairo to Sharjah was delayed more than an hour. From Sharjah to Dhaka was delayed more than an hour too. No internet, no screen in front. There was food services from Cairo to Sharjah but no food from Sharjah to Dhaka (almost 5 hours) food had to be purchased by cash UAE dirhams. Very rude ground staff in Cairo, Sharjah, Dhaka. They do not consider that everyone pays for his/her own trip, so every passenger is must be valued customer for the airline. I will never travel by this airline next time for sure.	0
Worst experience with an airline in my life! I had a trip booked for March. Cairo to Istanbul. They emailed me to tell me the flight had been cancelled. I emailed back to ask when I’d be refunded so I could book another flight. I got a response telling me my email had been blocked! I tried the main customer service site and no response to that either. I’ve never experienced this kind of  behaviour from an airline. Don’t use them!!!	0
Fes to Marrakech. Booked 7 weeks before travel, travel time changed 3 times, last time by e-mail at 18.55 the night before travel. Air Arabia charged extra for luggage. Each time they sent through new flight details, and each time the 30Kg luggage I'd paid extra for in advance disappeared. The last flight time was too late for me to travel, so I took the early train. Air Arabia have refused to refund me, and refused to refund the extra baggage I paid for, even though the extra luggage didn't fly. I couldn't recommend Air Arabia to anyone.	0
Coimbatore to Sharjah and had to catch the next flight to Riyadh, when I reached the Air Arabia staff for enquiry to understand how should I reach my boarding Gate he asked me to wait through the security check in line to reach the Gate-20 and I did without waiting for a second, when I reached the Gate they told me that my flight departed and when I reached the transfer desk I was treated as if I had missed the flight intentionally. I never expected such irresponsible behavior from Air Arabia staff in a international airport. It’s a complete mismanagement and pushing the blame on the passenger to shift the ticket cost to the passenger where the issue is from Air Arabia staff. Even when I was ready to pay for the new ticket the staff gave me a false information that there was no ticket in the next available ticket, but when I approached SATA they gave me a ticket seamlessly for 900 AED. I was shocked by irresponsible behavior of staff. There were three staff in the transfer desk counter a female staff and two male staff who all were rude and were repeatedly blaming me for the delay rather understanding that I was made to wait in the que by the AirArabia staff.	0
Casablanca to Tunis. Bad service, overcharged 60 euros at the airport for no reason, staff would not let us board the plane until we pay the 60 euros which they poorly explained was because we were "late" even though 2 other groups of passengers were allowed to board while we were there. The plane was then delayed for over an hour. We paid for additional meals when booking, we never got those, and the cabin crew ignored our requests and our proof of order, we were then presented a menu telling us we have to pay again to get food. They ignored our official complaint on their website.	0
Seoul to Istanbul via Almaty. I was uneasy throughout the flight. Passengers have been on board for over an hour and have not left. In the meantime, the announcement came 40 minutes later. The children's food came out as baby food. I asked stewardess the adult meals because child could not eat, but she declined firmly.	0
Very bad communication from Aeromexico customer service. Our flight was delayed from Vancouver to Cancun resulting in losing one day of our vacation time. On contacting Aeromexico customer service regarding the matter, I got a reply after exactly 1 month that they cannot do anything about it. Customer rep name is Alfonso Urbina Valdez. Extremely rude and inconsiderate agent. Not only this, our 4 year old was assigned a separate seat from his guardians. Upon requesting airport staff first they said they cannot do anything about it. Are these people insane or what? I would give negative reviews if I could. Never flying with Aeromexico again.	0
The worst customer service I experienced with an airline!!! I experienced a very bad costumer service on the same day of my flight. I first decided to upgrade my cabin from economy to business. While talking to the sales executive on the phone and when realized that I will not be refunded for the seats I already selected and paid for in AM Plus I decided not to upgrade. After the call I received an email (confirmation) from Aeromexico and then I realized my initial seat selection which I paid for them 1 month in advance where canceled! Checking on the app, I had to repay to select the seats while those seats I chose initially were not available and even worse no 3 seats next to each other to accommodate my family! Flying with a 2-year-old I had no other choice to upgrade! Apart from the very bad experience I had onboard in the business class (from the quality of the food to behavior of the crew) now the airline is refusing to pay the seats which were canceled by their sales executive! Its an absolute scam and zero customer service as they blocked my number calling them! No proper answer from the customer service (via email) as well. I do not recommend the airline at all!	0
AeroMexico is a complete scam. Do not use this airline for anything. Through Expedia, Aeromexico claimed to have purchased our tickets on Delta. They are supposedly partners. AeroMexico sent us a confirmation of our seats and our flight. When we got to the airport, Delta claimed that we didn’t have any seats, and the flight was full. We now could not get to our connecting flight in Los Angeles. We called Aeroméxico at the airport, and they said the flight was full, and there was nothing they could do. Aeromexico also claimed to have bought us tickets and reserve us seats from our flight from Los Angeles to Cancun. According to Delta, this also never happened… even though we showed them an obviously fake confirmation from Aeromexico with our fake reserved seats. This company is a complete scam, and it will cost you thousands of dollars to try and not have your vacation completely ruined after planning for it for literally years. Please save yourself	0
Extremely bad customer service and communication. My flight was scheduled to take off at 8:55pm and at 9:10pm they announced that the flight was delayed for an hour because they were waiting for the flight crew. An hour later they said that they were still waiting for 2 crew members, they boarded another flight before our flight and no information about our flight, going on 2 hours Daley waiting for the other flight to board and not even the decency to informed us or give us an update. If any passenger is not at the airport at least 2 hours before the flight they will lose their flight and have to purchase a whole new ticket so I think that is only fair that the airline should have to reimburse all the passengers for the flight.	0
I’ve been traveling with Aegean many times since I live in Athens. I saw (me included) at least 10 pay checks for overweight of 8kg. After arguing with the ground representative, she literally told me not to board  this flight.  I would say Aegean is apparently better than low fare airlines but staff need training to be professional and more polite.	0
The flights of Air Cairo starting from Hurghada were all delayed apart from one national flight. Our flight was marked "delayed" without any further information. Boarding started 5 min before the estimated departure. Passengers were driven to the Aircraft by bus and had to wait in the bus for 15 min. Then the bus drove back to the gate without any information and there was no staff at the gate. Passengers had to wait for almost 4 hours until boarding started again. Again no official information. The flight was redirected to Cologne instead of Dusseldorf. Therefore there a bus transfer to Dusseldorf was offered, which took a lot of time again. In total the arrival in Dusseldorf was delayed 5.5 hours and the only information we got was unofficial: A passenger said the pilot told him, the airline has failed to get a landing permission for the aircraft in Dusseldorf.	0
Doha to Alexandria. Flight cancellation without notification and a very rude attitude On the 13th May I had a flight from Doha to Alexandria Borg El Arab airport at 11:30 pm (Doha time). I was travelling with my 1 year old baby. I was in the airport at 9 pm and check for our counter station but couldn’t find the flight and it was scheduled. I started visiting travel and info offices at the airport to check the flight but they told me it is not registered on the airport screens as it is not scheduled in the first place and they guided me to visit the airlines offices next day at Ras Abou Abboud Street at 8am. I was shocked as I had to return back to my office next day. I spent the night in Doha and next morning and they refused to book me daytime and insisted to travel on the same time 11:30 pm on another airline after a two hours debate The country manager of the airline was very rude and had a terrible attitude and didn’t even bother to be a good marketer for his company and was upset to book another flight. This is a cheap low profile airline.	0
I have used Aer Lingus for decades and my last 3 experiences has been extremely bad. Me and my wife flew back for a relatives funeral and upon or return Aer Lingus canceled our flight and changed our flight with out notifying us. I paid extra for a direct flight, almost double to be exact, and they forced me on a connecting flight to Hartford, Connecticut, and we had to get a bus from Hartford to Newark. I was told it was only going to take 2 hours and because it’s under a 3 hour delay they would not comp us on anything whatsoever. The supervisor at Dublin airport was not helpful, just had an attitude when I tried to explain or situation and would not give us any alternative flights. I will never fly Aer Lingus again they don’t care for customers.	0
Vergognoso! Per risolvere qualunque cosa ti obbligano a chiamare il call center a pagamento. ( e avrete bisogno di loro sempre in quanto nulla può essere fatto in linea e hanno sempre problemi). Rilasciano buoni che non possono essere utilizzati online (ovviamente devi chiamare il call center), mandano link di pagamento che scadono in 2 ore e danno problemi sulla transazione ( ovviamente devi chiamare il call center). Assolutamente sconsigliati! - Shameful! To resolve anything they force you to call the paid call center. (and you will always need them as nothing can be done online and they always have problems). They issue vouchers that cannot be used online (obviously you have to call the call center), they send payment links that expire in 2 hours and give problems on the transaction (of course you have to call the call center). Absolutely not recommended!	0
I booked my flight with Air Caraibes to flight to Reunion through Paris in November 2019 using the travel agency Travel2Be. My flight was cancelled by the airline in late March. I receive a message saying that I can reschedule my flight for later. Then the situation with covid-19 got really bad and the EU issued a travel ban for all US citizens. I contacted Travel2Be to explain the situation to them and it took them a long time to reply saying that I have one year from the date of original purchase to use my tickets or I would lose them. I then tried to fill out a refund form on Air Caraibes. The site did not work and there was no email or number to contact them. I reply to the cancellation email, once again explaining the situation and asking them if they could extend the ticket to 2021. Their answer was use it by November 2020 or lose them. The airline cancelled the flight and this was out of their control but I also have not control over the travel ban. How are they expecting me to flight if I am banned from entering the EU and there are no end date for the ban? I have tried several emails and have received the same answer: use them by November or your lost. Best wishes. Are you kidding me? They basically took my money, didn’t provide any service and they won’t give it back. Both Travel2BE and Air Caraibes are horrible and dishonest companies. I will never ever use them or any companies associated with them. These companies are taking people’s money and then asking the government to bail them out. Who is going to bail the customer’s out? The customers who lost their money and probably have been affected greatly by the pandemic.	0
New York to Tel Aviv via Moscow in June 2019. Worst experience I've had with an airline. My flight from JFK to SVO, was continually delayed by Aeroflot without explanation. Even though the boarding time was never changed, we boarded over an hour late, then were told to get off after 80 minutes sitting on the plane without any sort of communication from Aeroflot staff about what was happening. They eventually claimed that they were trying to solve "mechanical issues" with the plane while we continued to sit on the plane. As I later heard airport staff commenting on, I have no idea why they boarded all of the passengers when they had clearly not solved the issue to begin with. To make matters worse, despite the flight taking off from New York (with many American and English-speaking passengers on board), most of the announcements were only made in Russian. After we got off, we were told that we would need to wait for up to 3 more hours to be notified about the status of our flight. We waited for almost 2 more hours before they canceled the flight - but, in fact, they did not admit to canceling the flight - instead, they claimed to have "delayed" the flight for a full 24 hours! Many passengers, myself included, were upset and frustrated, but this was not the end of the complete botching of this flight by Aeroflot. They seemed to have no planned response to this scenario. They herded us all upstairs to claim our luggage, and then had us wait in obscenely long lines to check in with two Aeroflot staff members  to claim an updated ticket for the 24-hour-delayed flight and/or a hotel voucher. After already being delayed for hours, we had to wait on these lines for at least an additional 1-2 hours. The worst part of this whole disaster was that Aeroflot claimed that they were not rebooking anyone's flight because the flight had not technically been canceled, it had been delayed (according to them). Most reasonable airlines release tickets once a flight has been canceled (as this one effectively had been, clearly) so that passengers can rebook on other flights, but Aeroflot was able to get around that by "delaying" the flight.  The staff that were handing out the new tickets and hotel vouchers were quite rude and displayed no sympathy for customers who had been treated so poorly by the airline already (I understand they were dealing with many angry customers, but they still could have at least apologized on the behalf of the airline, which they did not). Sure enough, even though I had a program in Tel Aviv that required my presence before the "delayed" flight's arrival, Aeroflot would not rebook my flight. I was lucky enough to have a travel agent for this trip, and they were able to demand that Aeroflot rebook my flight to another airline after a lot of frustration on their part, requiring me to rush to another airport after a whole night of no sleep. The entire experience was handled so poorly and unprofessionally from beginning to end that I will never fly with Aeroflot again.	0
I am writing this with complete dismay, disappointment, shock, helplessness, and utter anger. If you know what is good for you, avoid this airline at all costs. I have dreamed of a Morocco trip since 2005. This trip is a lifelong dream. I've booked multiple flights in and around Morocco for October to November. In a span of several weeks, almost each single flight has been moved and re-scheduled. The last straw was when I received an email today notifying a flight change that will mean losing 2 days in Morocco and completely ruining the entire itinerary and losing some paid transfers and tours in the process. I am in complete disbelief as I have been traveling for 28 years and have never encountered an airline so incompetent. They have removed every single way to reach them. All emails are automated, you cannot contact anyone through email, and the number they gave to call is also not in service. I feel so helpless and our trip has been single-handedly ruined by Air Arabia even before it began. I have lost all hope and excitement for this trip and even if I somehow manage to find a way to adjust our itinerary, it will still not recover a portion of the trip that has already been paid for. This company should be banned because all reviews here have a horror story of their own.	0
6 hours delay from Fez to Gatwick and zero compensation. Reason is that the company not registered within Europe. Avoid because you have absolutely zero rights. Even Ryanair is better abide to European regulation. Avoid avoid.	0
This was probably the worst experience I've had with an airline. In hindsight, I should have opted for a full service airline even at the premium cost. Our flight was on the 22nd of August, Sharjah to Kuala Lumpur. We paid for seats up-front (in row no. 4) hoping that we'd be able to travel with others who place a premium on their peace of mind and convenience. I could not have been more wrong about this. As soon as I sat in my seat, a raucous, rowdy group of customers walked in and sat right in front of us in Rows no. 2 and 3. At first, it just looked like a bunch of young people who were flying to KL for a good time and they'd settle in after a few hours of in-flight fun. Something told me that this trip was going to be problematic, but I just chalked that up to older me nerves. Drink service started. Our merry band selected a plane load of coffee and Red Bull for dinner to go with some sandwiches that AA provided. Being an overnight flight, once service was stopped, cabin crew switched off their lights. As they say, the party started after the lights went off. The group on the left put on their reading lamps which needless to say is quite jarring and did not aid in anyone falling asleep in a 2 m radius. The group on the right seemed sober and some of them curled up to sleep. The others were high on Coffee and Red Bull so they were fully charged up.  I went up to the cabin crew and requested them to ask this bunch to simmer down. It was about midnight UAE time and it is my belief that a paying customer is entitled to his sleep during the flight. To my surprise the cabin crew shrugged and said there was nothing they could do. Apparently, this was a group of 'bloggers' who were invited by Air Arabia to review the airline or its holiday package. The cabin crew supervisor went so far as to tell me to go complain if I wanted to and they couldn't care less. The shenanigans continued late into the night and at this time, my normally docile wife spoke up. We asked them respectfully to tone it down so that we could get some sleep before our onward flight to the next destination to which we got a casual dismissal and was yelled back at. Cabin crew came to calm down the situation, which was the best they could do. After this incident, their belligerence was unfettered for the reminder of the flight. The laughing and the talking were louder and unbelievably uncivilized.  In effect, I paid additional to be harassed by a bunch of low-life thugs aided and abetted by the service provider. We were rendered powerless by an apathetic cabin crew and an airline that frankly does not give two hoots about the rights of its paying passengers. I have been flying Air Arabia since its inception, but I am completely done now. A loss of one customer means nothing to Air Arabia but it is my hope that reading reviews like this would give people an idea of the kind of people they give their money to.	0
Avoid this airline. I had 4 separate flights with Aeromexico. Each flight was delayed for hours without an explanation or something for the inconvenience. I will never fly this airline again. Horrible.	0
I used to be the biggest fan of Aeromexico. The staff was amazing - professional, courteous, and very friendly (and still are with the obvious exceptions (mentioned below). Unfortunately, our recent trip leaves us questioning whether or not we will ever risk using their services again. If you have or have traveled with someone with, a disability, you know how important it is that boarding the aircraft be done in an organized manner. Those that have issues (health, age, children, etc) need that little extra time before regular boarding commences. It's not meant to be a free-for-all. Well, not unless you board your Aeromexico (AM) flight out of the satellite Mexico City airport, NLU (Santa Lucia). NLU is a relatively brand new airport (opened March 2022) and it appears that the AM staff has yet to be trained on basic procedures. We had 2 bad experiences in NLU. The first was flying in on the way to Veracruz and the second was the return trip out. While the first flight was total chaos, we were fortunate enough that several of the gentlemen at the front of the line saw that my husband was an amputee, etc, and immediately waved us to the front. While this was disorganized, it wasn't the mess that the return flight out of NLU was. The second flight, NLU to Guadalajara was a nightmare. There was absolutely no control over the passengers. When it was time to board, there were no zones or even basic pre-boarding. AM had a group of 20-30 who appeared to be traveling together (not young, disabled, etc) who were let on first. We were about halfway in the line. There was no Premier boarding -- one of the benefits that AM promises its passengers who pay a bit more. Nope, it was a cluster eff free-for-all. Oh, silly my. I forgot to mention not only does my 76-year-old amputee husband need the special boarding, but WE WERE also PAYING PREMIER PRICES for the early boarding. We didn't get it. So, we finally get to our seats and watched as there was no control as the passengers boarded. Several economy passengers just casually jammed their stuff in the Premier overhead bins. Result? Hubby had problems with his carry-on (which had his meds) and which came off badly scuffed. Please understand, I realize that space is limited on flights, but if you pay for certain benefits, you should get those benefits. We did not. I wrote to complain and got the stand "too bad, so sad" letter in return. I had asked for compensation. Of course, that's not going to happen. No, I wasn't looking for a free flight or reimbursement of our tickets. As my girl Judge Judy says, "we ate the steak." What I was looking for was a small compensation to acknowledge that they did not deliver as promised. Instead, I got a form letter that any trained lizard could, and did, write. We will look elsewhere in the future and heartily recommend that you do the same.	0
My main complaint with Aeromexico is they don't stick to their scheduled flying times and flight delays are the customer's problem, not theirs. Due to a flight delay I had an unplanned layover of 16 hours at the Mexico City Airport. The airline doesn't offer any compensation. It doesn't have any customer service. The price I paid for a hotel stay completely negated the savings of buying a cheap plane ticket. I think they should tell people that sleeping on an airport bench is part of the travel package and your airline itinerary is just a rough guide. I wouldn't recommend flying with Aeromexico.	0
We had made a FLEX (P) reservation, that we had to cancel due to pregnancy. The extra fee to cancel was 45€/ticket. This is something we already knew. What we didn't know is that the only way to cancel is through their Call Center. But in that case, which is actually the only possible case, there is an extra Call Center fee of 20€/ticket. At the same time, all the extra services you have purchased (even if there is no such clause in the "Terms & Conditions" we agreed on), meaning extra baggage, purchased selected seats etc, are turned into some kind of "owed service" valid for a year. Not a voucher valid for a year, the service must have been used, not purchased, in a year.  Finally, for some undetectable reason the refund had to take place, not automatically to the card we used to make the reservation, but we had to fill out another form, one for each ticket/passenger, with our bank account details, for the reimbursements to take place separately and via bank accounts.	0
Three passengers paid for extra legroom for both legs of our trip, Madrid - Athens and Athens - Larnaca. On the online system and on the reservations we were given extra legroom seats. At the ticket issuance at the airport these were changed to normal seats without any explanation. We were advised to write an email for refund. Wrote an email on June 19th 2022. Since then, wrote 4 more emails, phoned the airline 5 times and each time they told me they see the case and i am right but they cannot do anything about it because they are ticketing and customer service can only be contacted via email. Eight months later and no reply, no acknowledgement nor refund. Zero customer service, zero respect for client.	0
I pay GBP412 for 4 passengers - Heathrow to Belfast - this fare includes 63 pounds for extra legroom seats and 112 pounds for 25kg checked baggage x 4. Aer Lingus can no longer provide this service - they booked us onto a British Airways flight but on the 'cheap' seats - with hand baggage only, to the value of approximately GBP150 pounds for all 4 of us. There were checked baggage options available as I asked BA and it still would have only cost 215 pounds compared to the 412 I paid Aer Lingus. Now Aer Lingus reuse to refund me the extra legroom and checked baggage fees. I have to pay again to BA to have 25kg checked baggage x 4 and extra legroom seats are now not available. They take your money, can't provide a service, refuse a reasonable request for refunds, book you on a third of the price seats/flight and pocket my change. Their terms and conditions are the seats/tickets are non refundable - I understand this however my seats / tickets with Aer Lingus are non existent so how do these rubbish non refundable terms and conditions apply to a non existent service? As you can imagine - they can't or WON'T answer that. Their email to me said an alternative flight or refund - I requested the refund and of course was ignored. So unprofessional and unethical and such poor customer service! You should be ashamed of your greedy selves.	0
From the moment we purchased tickets, we had the most shockingly bad customer service. Be aware: you can do nothing online, including book or change seats and must call Customer Service for everything. They do not respond to emails, customer service is outsourced to overseas Indian or Eastern European countries where some do not speak English well enough to answer your query. They always say you have to email but you never receive a response (this after 24 emails over 3 mths and no responses). We flew business and they ran out of food. They offered economy meals. Flight attendants clearly did not like their jobs. The food (when you did manage to get any) was horrible and it was next to impossible to get a second drink, even water. Finally, we arrived in SFO to hear my husband's name called - they put my bag on the flight from Dublin but not his. We were leaving and checked through from Paris. They promised it would arrive next day, next flight. 10 days later it is still listed as tracking and in Dublin. We phoned several times to be told it was still in Dublin as far as they could see. We went several times to the airport and checked Lost Luggage -also finally went a 3rd day to see the same flight coming in and found a helpful man on security who phoned around. He left to go to an 'office' and came out with our bag. Fully tagged. It is still listed as 'being tracked'. We have contacted Aer Lingus to advise this but still listed as being in Dublin. . This has been one of the most horrible airlines we have ever flown.	0
Lost my luggage, dishonest and ignored. Ruined a family Christmas in New York. You can see from other reviews, losing luggage has become a habit with this airline so you would have hoped that they would have a better way of dealing with it by now. Unfortunately, there is no help whatsoever and they couldn’t have cared less. We return to the UK tomorrow. Who knows if we will ever see our luggage again. Never fly with Aer Lingus.	0
I travelled from Canada to Birmingham via Dublin. Worst worst customer service .At the airport we found all our luggage was lost, we were asked to file the missing luggage form, and was told we might get it the same day. No further instructions. Until today 2days after, I don't have my luggage. Calling airport, customer service no reply, line busy but never got through. Worst airport and airlines. I am pregnant and I have a 2 year old kid. My medication and my son they are all in the luggage. No clothes to wear, have to do some shopping on my own expense . I was not told anything if I can claim or whatever. I have travel insurance but was told by the officer at the airport no need to claim. I am traveling to another country tomorrow but still no luggage. This is so unprofessional. I wish I read reviews before booking with this airlines. Never travelling with them nor will I refer them.	0
Our flight was canceled due to the Covid-19 issues, but from Air Caraïbes we never received mails concerning our canceled flight. Once we figured out ourselves, we were offered (by text on the website) to change date.  So in fact only the date that was affected was changeable, meaning our holiday was shortened by several weeks! Almost never did a new search for a reservation work. It was not available or simply not possible. No reason was given. You receive error messages in code (no text, but numbers with no explanation whatsoever) for whatever you try to do. They offer no help at all. The chat on the website is a robot that is not even capable of understanding what your question is and responded with answers we never asked for. Asking for help by phone is impossible and not even free. I already had to rebook my flight 4 times and every time the same mess again. Eventually since July they offer a refund in cash (to your credit card). Although I was legit for a full refund by reading the needed conditions on their site, once I submitted for the refund, I got a message saying that in my 'specific' situation I need to call Air Carraïbes for further assistance and predictable as I had read in many other reviews. No one is responding my call. In no way is it possible to get decent help or assistance and figuring out if everything is still in the running is all up to you to follow up your booking. For 2 of the rebookings I was going to receive a small refund of €21. Even today no refund was given. But in the cases where I had to pay a supplement, before realizing it, it was already taken from my credit card. As soon as you receive your new tickets with new dates, you receive a message in your account that dates are canceled or will not be available (again). It's terrible how they treat their customers. Never flown with them and never intend to in the future. To be clear, we have a ticket and booked a flight, but we were so far not able to fly, change dates or receive a refund or a better date to fly in the future. So our choice never to fly them in the future is because of the lack of a respectful customer service.	0
The worst airline ever! They don't speak English and rarely do they ever reply to you (and even if they do, that will be in French of course). Online check-in is fake - it doesn't work before the flight and they refuse to help you with that over the phone or email. Their employees at the airport are very unfriendly and completely unhelpful when met in person - you see that you are a burden for them when you need help at the airport. Besides, the airline lost my baggage and it can't be traced any more at all. Conclusion: if possible, try to avoid this terrible airline, it's the worst French airline for sure, low-costs show you more respect and understanding than this horrible airline. Don't fly them if you want a pleasant flight and good pre-/post-flight experience.	0
Berlin to Delhi via Moscow. Will never fly Aeroflot again once this trip is completed. Traveling with 3 kids, they bumped me off my business class confirmed flight, without my consent and without a forwarding confirmed flight. 4 hours waited at the international ticketing desk, in an area with no water/food, with 3 young kids, since according to Russian law to enter the terminal you need to clear immigration and security. Requested/demanded to meet supervisor, was told by staff that they were in another building! Finally get into the terminal and then spend next 10 hours at another information desk in the terminal. With 3 kids this was absolutely one of the worst travel experiences, especially since I paid for business class to have the comfort. They finally put us up in one of the worst hotel rooms imaginable (available only at 10pm), with no ability to upgrade (since we were not in the ‘Russian section’ of the hotel). We were finally able to get out of Moscow the following day, 24hrs later. No response from Aeroflot customer service. Don’t expect one. Don’t think they care either. Just a piece of advice: shell out the extra $200 and get another airline into Delhi. You might end up wasting that money at their airport/hotel etc.	0
We were traveling from Amsterdam to Phuket with stopover in Moscow Sheremetyevo which is a total mess. None of our 4 suitcases arrived at the final destination. We were crowding with a large group of travelers at the baggage claim desk at Phuket airport who had the same problem with Aeroflot. The staff was continuously smiling but that does not help. Aeroflot claims that they have a lost luggage tracking system but it doesn’t work. Calling customer support is pointless. I called like 20 times and I was every time disconnected while waiting on the line. The staff in Phuket promised to deliver bags tomorrow to our hotel. If that happens I will amend this rating but that is how the situation looks for now. Having all 4 bags lost for every member of the family is the worst nightmare that can happen to you while on your holidays.	0
New York to Istanbul via Moscow. The flight boarded late because they were overbooked. The flight itself was fine. But once we landed in Istanbul we realized two of our luggages were missing. After running around trying to find where it was they told us the luggages were still is Moscow but would not tell us when or how we would get it back, they told us to wait and it would be on another flight down to Istanbul but not which flight it would be on. I called Aeroflot no answer (keeps saying they’re helping others and to call back later) I emailed and no answer. I filed a claim and no answer. At this point I have no idea where my luggage is or when I’m going to get it back.	0
Sharjah to Sohag. My bad experience with Air Arabia customer service on the boarding on gate, customer service of staff is zero. They charge me for my laptop weight. I tried to ask about their names they covered the tags. What a kind of customer service.	0
Gatwick to Fes. Beware of the hand baggage allowance! They charged me 50 euros for exceeding the maximum of 10kg just by 3 kg. and on the same time the flight was almost empty! I didnt have any other complaints but the whole thing with the hand luggage was really ridiculous! The worst part is when I refused to pay 50 euros, the staff tried to bargain so I could pay 35 euros! Totally unacceptable and unprofessional on the whole. They were actually blackmailing me, without giving me the ticket to board if I i didnt pay for the 50 euros charge. And that was just for 3 kg more! I think rules are rules but when you know that the flight is not really full and you dont exceed the allowance by 10-20 kg, I think it should be acceptable that 3kg wont hurt anyone. I would never recommend anyone book with this airline rather than picking up a more serious one and more professional.	0
We had a flight leaving Puerto Vallarta connecting in Mexico City to Toronto. Our fright from PV departed late and then when we landed in Mex City our plane was unable to gate for about 15 mins. When we finally got out of the plane at 17:43 we raced to our connecting flight which is supposed to depart 18:05. We got there at 17:55 and were denied boarding. They sent us to customer service that got us on the next flight at 23:55. We paid for upgraded seats because I’m a tall guy and we did not get them on the later flight due to availability. When we called the airline customer service for a refund for the upgrades they told us to contact the customer service email and promptly hung up on us. We called back and spoke with another representative and she informed us we would indeed have to email customer service. We did email them, but got a prompt email back basically telling us there is nothing they can do refund us. Now that I’ve read reviews for this airline I see it’s a common problem. I will be doing a charge back on my Mastercard when the payment is processed.	0
I suggest you fly with another airline if you speak English! They are not fluent in English. The customer service is poor. They cancelled our flight because we could not accept the changes they made, which was a 24 hour layover. They would not refund our money, and tried to charge us $1,200 more dollars for another flight. I hear that they continuously have layover issues. Several people were late to our resort for a wedding due to this airline. They will not accommodate you in any way if you have car trouble and miss your flight. They will not give you a standby flight! They expect you to pay for another flight. Please be wary of this airline! It would be better to spend a little more money, and get better customer service, and know that you would be accommodated fairly if there were issues, which are sometimes inevitable.	0
Terrible service and handling of delayed and then cancelled flight. Understaffed to change boarding pass so we had to wait for hours in line. Very poor service.	0
The first flight from Zurich to Athens was perfect & without any problems. However the second flight back was horrible and unorganized. Everything started when the gate opened & the boarding started.  They started to weight luggage and created a huge queue. I had a hand luggage, which was taken by them, because the haven't had anymore space in the airplane. My Father had a hand luggage too, but they didn't take his with them. When we arrived in front of the airplane with the bus, they started to check, which luggage had a tag on it, so they can take it with them.  In the airplane they were organizing the luggage above our heads & trying to make more space. However my Father's luggage was too much, so I had to go in front of the Airplane to give it to them. They had to take it with them and store it with the other ones under us. The plane was almost 30 Minutes late.  Never flying with them again.	0
An experience that was neither good or bad until we tried to order water for our 2 year old. We ordered it, was asked to wait while the cabin crew was giving out hot food. After 20min we asked again and we were asked to wait. After another 20min, she started to cry uncontrollably, and we walked up to the crew (who was still busy giving out hot meal) that we really needed to give our child some water. When we finally got it, it was impossible to stop our girl from crying even when she got the water (well, most parents would understand that it was too late and the damage has already been done). So after calming her down (which took another 10-15min) she started to drink and became happy again. It was a bad experience for everyone, our 2 year old, us as her parents and all other passengers. A situation that could easily have been avoided, which would have been nice as flying with kids often means stress. Why couldn’t a person in the crew just stop for 1minute and help out? They didn’t even seemed bothered or at least a bit guilty when we explained that we couldn’t continue waiting because a 2 year old doesn’t understand that.	0
I was flying back to Raleigh from Spain on Aer Lingus with stops in Dublin and Boston. However when I got to Dublin Aer Lingus had a system failure so all their EU flights were canceled but they were still pushing out the flights to the US. My flight got delayed 3 times however we finally boarded but about 30-40 minutes after boarding and right when the air hostess were giving the safety instructions they got a call from the pilot and couple minutes later the Pilot announced that the flight couldn't take off because he would go over the amount of flying time he can legally complete. When the flight was canceled it was around 11 pm and they promised to give us a hotel and reimburse us for finding new flights. They did not find us new flights we had to find them ourselves and they didn't provide us with accommodations. I ended up sleeping on the floor of the airport over night and spent at least 30 hours in the airport because of this whole ordeal. To this day I still haven't received the refund or the reimbursement for finding a new flight and it is now 2.5 months later. I understand that they would have been understaffed and thrown off guard when the system crashed but no staff member that I talked to seemed like they wanted to help. I reached out to their customer service about rebooking my flight they didn't get back to me 2 days after I got back to the states about rebooking my flight.	0
Could not check in, thanks to an aggressive, dismissive, I couldn’t care less about customers employee. This employee refused to make a small correction on my boarding pass that others have done before without any problem. She was aggressive, stated several times that it was not her job to help customers, she didn’t have time to waste and did not care. Missed my flight, my business meeting and had to buy another ticket from another company. Avoid at any cost!	0
Just a general warning to avoid Aer Lingus at all costs. Their planes are very old, felt like I was in a 70’s film. That didn’t bother me at all but just thought I’d note that. The main problem was the constant delays. Sure there was a issue with ice when the plane was en route to Chicago so it got delayed which is understandable. However this delay was not made known to anyone on the flight and after the gate changing 3 times and 4 hours after the plane was supposed to take off did the counter staff arrive and make an announcement of the delay which would cause my partner and I to miss our connection on Aer Lingus as well to Portugal. I called customer service 4 times, waited on hold for a total of 3 hrs only to be hung up on all 4 times and told to call Alaska who we booked through, though each time Alaska told us Aer Lingus has to make the changes and Aer Lingus refused to make the changes when Alaska told us Aer Lingus had to do it. Ended up having to make the change in Dublin airport. Overall awful experience.	0
Paris to San Francisco. Extremely sketchy airline. They cancelled our flight back from Paris due to "operational difficulties" and said they could only book us on a flight 2 days later. They would not refund us the money for the flight even though they could not offer anything even close to what we booked. Their customer service just sent us in circles: call this number, call back tomorrow, submit a ticket here, email this address, call this other number. The company hides behind their phone reps, having them continuously say "The company has issued a statement saying they will not refund anyone's money for the flight". If you cancel a flight and can only replace it with a flight two days later you better give customers the opportunity to take a refund.	0
Last week my wife and son flew Aeroflot with a 1hr 20 min connection through Moscow Sheremetyevo. The flight from Almaty touched down in Moscow on time, but passengers had to wait 20 minutes for the terminal bus to arrive. The stewardess assured my wife that if the connecting flight was missed, "they will give you seats on the next flight." The plane was served by only one bus, so everyone had to wait for all passengers on the plane to disembark before the bus ever left for the terminal. Transit passengers in Terminal D must pass through a security and passport control check before entering the terminal. By the time my wife and son cleared the security check, the boarding gate for their connecting flight to JFK had closed. Nevertheless, they made all haste to the departure gate, hoping they would be allowed to board, but they were too late. Aeroflot agents told my wife that the missed connection was her fault and she would have to pay full fare for the onward journey, more than $1,700. My wife had only a little over $900 on her card. I transfered the money to my wife's card so she could buy her and my son's ticket. This kind of mistreatment goes far beyond bad customer service.	0
Moscow to Los Angeles. The ticket staff in Moscow were rude. We upgraded our ticket from economy to business class the day before our flight. We were told to come back the next day to have our boarding passes printed out. This was after waiting in line for an hour - with 30 minutes of that being with the ticket counter representative ignoring us. Our flight was scheduled to board at 11:20 am the next day, so at 8am we went to customer service and asked about getting our boarding passes printed. Again, we were met with staff who cared more about ignoring is then helping us. They told us to go to the gate at 11am, which we did, and it was chaos. When staff finally helped us they said business class was full. When we upgraded we were told there were 6 seats, so we would have had seats if they just printed our boarding passes when we asked the first time.	0
Terrible experience. They managed to lose my bag and it’s been 4 days and I still don’t have my suitcase. I spent close to 3 hours waiting at the carousel then in line to the lost and found office (there were about 20 people from the same flight who didn’t get their bags), they gave me a piece of paper with the tracking number and their contact info. I tried to call the number many many times and nobody answers. I sent emails, no response. 4 days and I still don’t have my bag and have no information on where it might be or what to do next.  If something goes wrong you won’t be able to get in touch with them.	0
I was flying from Hyderabad to Bahrain via Sharjah,while I was transit to Bahrain at Sharjah airport the ground staff of weighed hand bag & laptop was carrying on cabin then demanded to pay 200 riyals as fine for the baggage. I had no chance to debate with them because of their horrible attitude towards passengers. I suggest you don't waste your valuable time & money by flying with Air Arabia for their worst hospitality & cheap flight tickets.	0
Agadir to Birmingham. Not sure how this airline is allowed to legally operate?? They cancelled flights with no notice and cost us over £500 in additional costs to get to destination. They offered no reason, no compensation and ignored most of the communications between myself and them. Absolute disaster. Never again. They need to be banned from operating within the EU.	0
We bought two tickets from Prague to Kathmandu via Sharjah in November 2018. We were supposed to leave April 13, 2019,  Ten days before the flight we tried to add some food and to change baggage allowance through internet browser. It must be said that their website does not work optimal in any of the internet browsers. We managed to change baggage allowance but no food. From that reason we log out and tried to add food later but we realized we don´t have access to our PNR anymore. We had still ten days to departure so we tried to contact their customer service via e-mail. Till now we do not have any answer. We contacted sales department in Prague by phone and also personally. They proved our PNR with conclusion we had cancelled both tickets in internet browser ourselves and the flight is full. We are still in shock. Two weeks of holiday, year of preparations for our big way to Himalayas, another friend waiting us in Kathmandu, services paid in Nepal are gone. Mainly, nobody let us know about tickets cancellation.  If I wasn´t interested about my PNR, I wouldn´t know yet my tickets are cancelled. As proof they just reproduced conclusion of their IT Department in Sharjah. You have no chance to get in touch with somebody from their central agency in Sharjah. Mainly I would like to point out that I do not get any document confirming ticket cancellation.  Welcome in modern times full of IT technologies where human being is a poor individual and those big fish use it for making money	0
I'm replying back on Air Astana's response which been posted on 18th September 2018 : Air Astana's response: Let us highlight that the transfer counter in Beijing is not just an Air Astana or Cathay Dragon transfer counter. It is a general airport transfer counter for all airlines, and all transfer passengers wait there for the counter to be opened at 6am. Based on the report from our colleagues in Beijing, on arrival you were met by our staff, who checked your baggage tag and passport. After the transfer counter opened, you were provided with boarding pass on time and continued with your flight to Hong Kong. I asked so many times Air Astana representatives to recheck exactly this details about operation hours of transit counter in Beijing, they weren't able to give me an answer. Based on the report - "your colleague in Beijing met me and provided the boarding pass"?! Nobody met me at the transfer zone, the lady from the immigration desk saw i was crying and offered me the help, she wrote on a piece of paper details of my flight based on my ticket on my phone, the boarding pass i got only at the gate, couple minutes before it closed! My baggage was founded by Cathay Dragon - yes, but when at the same day i called Air Astana representatives before my baggage been found and asked to check regarding my missing baggage, i got an answer over email only after 1 week. I have been a loyal customer of Air Astana over 11 years and instead of apologies, Air Astana representative try to look this case that it's my fault - its fault of Air Astana representatives. You cannot sell on your official website the tickets which have only 1H transit time, i believe you should recheck transit desks operating hours before you sell those connection flight or at least notify your clients about potential risk of missing the connecting flight, as flight arrive at 5AM transit desk open at 6AM next flight at 7AM. 2. I believe Air Astana representatives should have better knowledge about those details and when clients ask about transfer activities in the airport where will be connection flight, your rep. should be able to provide this info. I will not even bother to write all this post but its very affair that after 11 years using your airline I have been treated like this!	0
I did not make this trip because Aeromexico does not have bad customer services, they have no customer service. I booked Austin to Lima roundtrip in first class for my husband and I. Approximately 3 months before our trip, I began receiving e-mails with changes to my itinerary ... significant changes which ultimately resulted in 2 extra legs to the trip and removal from first class for all travel except Mexico City to Lima. I have an extensive record of my efforts to speak to someone to address these unacceptable changes - e-mails, calls, Facebook chats - for 2 months and never spoke to anyone who could do anything except give me a different e-mail address to submit my problem to. Thus the extensive record using multiple e-mail addresses provided to me by Aeromexico staff. This itinerary was impossible for my elderly husband - changing planes 4 times, taking an entire day of travel, and riding in coach (after paying for first class) was beyond his capabilities. Ultimately, we had to relinquish our trip - continued to seek some kind of compensation, and have yet to speak to a single person who had any authority to assist us before or since the date of our travels. I will never use this airline for any trip ever again.	0
This review is about the ticket purchase. On September 30, 2022, I purchased a ticket from Aeromexico, in my partners name to fly from Tijuana to Puerto Vallarta. The ticket price was $169.04. I paid with my Capital One credit card, but the transaction was held because my bank questioned the charge. I responded to the bank immediately and the charge went through. All this within 10 minutes or so.. I then received an e-mail confirming that the flight was booked and he was ready to fly. Great, no problem. In the meantime Alejandro got the notice that it was time to check in. When he attempted to check in on line he was unable to do so, and instead was notified that he had to see a gate agent. On Monday October 24, Alejandro got to the airport and went to the ticket counter where he was told that the ticket had not been paid, and he’d have to pay about $436.00 for a new ticket. Not having any other recourse, and needing to get home, he reluctantly paid the exhorbitant amount that Aeromexico required. The next day, he called Aeromexico and told then that the money had been originally paid for the ticket and that he wanted a refund of the more than $400.00 that he was forced into paying. Their response was to offer to refund the $169.04 that was the original cost of the ticket. Note that offering that, indicates that they know they were paid originally and they knew how much. It’s hard to think that this is not a scam, but it is highly unusual that an airline would release the ticket and then turn around and claim it was never paid.	0
Bought a trip back in 2019 for easter 2020, and then COVID hit the world. Instead of giving me my money back on a flight which didn't even take off, they wanted to give me airline credit. On top of that my final destination flight were cancelled permanently, I had no way of getting to the destination I bought the ticket for. They however claimed I could use this for other destinations, which is not what I bought. I sued them and finally received my moneyback after 2 years, obviously with a steep commission paid to the lawyers. Aeromexico has no regulation or care for their customer. I am never going to fly with them again. Don't be swayed by their cheap prices, it’s all a cover up for poor customer service.	0
As a frequent flier with Star Alliance, Oneworld over the last 10 years, I STRONGLY recommend anyone to avoid Aeromexico at all costs. Terrible policies (12-month refund period for a flight that they delay for nearly a day) and even worse customer service. I can confidently say they are MUCH worse than budget/low-cost airlines.	0
This airline refuse to refund my ticket that I purchased through Priceline the traveling day was Nov 19 because I had a family event in Nicaragua. Aeromexico canceled the flight and changed to Nov 18 with a layover in Mexico for 10 hours I call the same day I got an email from Priceline saying the change of traveling plans. Their response was contact Priceline because the ticket were booked through them but Aeromexico charged my credit card Priceline said they can’t refund ticket because they only can make changes back and forth.	0
Worst baggage experience ever. My bag was delayed at my connection in Athens on 9th August 2022 and Aegean has not responded to my request for first need expense, multiple attempts to reach them via email, and when I called the automated line said "We do not have the resources to handle your request" The worst part is I paid extra to check my bag.	0
They canceled the flight a day before departure, then refused to issue a refund, not once, but twice. Awful airline, avoid at all costs.	0
Paris Orly to Punta Cana (Dominican Republic) with Air Caraibes, and a very bad experience. 36 hours of delay. Very old and dirty plane, and no inflight entertainment screen. The cabin crew were extremely unpleasant, and Air Caraibes Customer service never answer to me. You have a number of your seat but when you arrive in the cabin crew just say "you can sit where you want"! Crazy, and it was unconfortable travel	0
We were expected to travel from London and Paris to Calvi, all booked together on family holidays. Air Corsica suspended all flights from London giving only two weeks’ notice and did not accept to refund tickets from the third passenger travelling from Paris. The third passenger could not travel alone, and we also had to cancel accommodation and car rental resulting in additional costs incurred. Extremely poor customer service, many emails and phone calls since September. Lots of time and money lost and extremely high frustration.	0
Bastia to Stansted. Group of 8 flying as a family. At check-in, Air Corsica staff mixed up baggage tags so they did not correspond to the correct individual. Air Corsica then decided not to load a full trolley of luggage on to the flight to ensure it was not delayed. 4 out of 8 bags did not arrive at Stansted within our family (alongside numerous other families that were also missing bags). We proceeded to inform staff but as the luggage tags were on incorrect bags due to incompetent staff, we could not make it as clear as it should have been on the missing bag forms. 3 out of 4 bags arrived within 5 working days. Our bag has never been recovered. Air Corsica have then proceeded to make it impossible to track it down or receive a refund for lost luggage. Website does not allow you to save or upload correct information so 4 times we had to restart our request. They refuse to speak English on the phone. After we finally processed the refund request, they sent one reply saying the bag had been returned and therefore the case was closed. They then closed the request without even contacting us and so we therefore had no way of appealing this. The bag has never returned. We have now had to go through our insurance provider but even this is being made difficult as they aren't even able to get hold of Air Corsica and as our luggage tags were incorrect we are having to speak to multiple insurance providers that we took insurance out with even though it only affected one of us.  We flew in September 2019, are now in February 2020 and are still trying to receive compensation for our luggage.	0
I asked for water & was refused initially and given after 1 hr when all passengers were served. On landing, after waiting at belt for 45 mins for luggage, we got to know that luggage was not transferred from St. Petersburg flight to Moscow flight and it will take 2 days for luggage to reach us. We were given mobile no for queries and that number was kept switched off entire day.	0
Lisbon to Hanoi via Moscow. A ridiculous scene in Moscow with a group of staff trying to measure and weigh luggage of passengers. I am on business class and have only one backpack and a roller bag. Only bought two pieces of duty free so the roller bag was expanded and could not put through their cage. They refused my boarding and rudely responded to my request to speak to someone.  I have flown them 6 times over the last 12 months and their cabin services are decent. Unfortunately their action today was so bad that I would avoid them from now on.	0
Mumbai to Tbilisi via Sharjah. Worst experience. I am a student and i was travelling from Mumbai to Tbilisi,I was allowed to carry 10 kg hand carriage. So i had my 10 kgs and my laptop bag. In Mumbai Airport it wasn't a issue they let me pass. Once I've reached Sharjah for transit they started weighing my laptop bag and took my ticket away and asked me to pay fine. Never had such a worst experience. Never using Air Arabia again.	0
Gatwick to Fez. Flying to Fez, the flight was delayed by 3.5 hours and we were sat on the aircraft without a clue as to what the delay was caused by. The staff were disinterested in serving passengers and they would only accept euros or sterling to buy some of their overpriced food items. They forgot to take payment from me for a sandwich I bought and seemed disorganised. They told me that drinks were free on this flight. Flying back to Gatwick - the flight was delayed again by 40 minutes, again for a reason we weren't told. Staff again seemed disinterested. I tried to order a drink and was told to pay for it when on my previous flight with Air Arabia, the drink was free. So there's really no consistency in the customer service you receive.	0
Amsterdam to Fez. Terrible company! Just like it happened to other people, we had an extra luggage but the people at the check-in desk could not see it on the system. We therefore had to pay an extra 50 euros fee on top of the luggage fee paid beforehand through the website. When asked, the lady at the check-in counter said that this happens frequently. So please do consider this if you want extra luggage. For the rest it is overall not better that other low-cost companies that are much cheaper. Would not fly with them again and would not recommend to other people, unless you enjoy being robbed.	0
Hong Kong to Tbilisi via Almaty. A horrible and awful experience I ever met. Unprofessional ground crew and poor arrangement of delayed flight. I wont take Air Astana again and wont recommend.	0
Masks required and policed.  Will not be back on this airline. Also, they wanted me to upgrade so I could have a suitcase. That’s when I found out I was only allowed a purse, no carry on suitcase. A $190 upgrade would allow me a suitcase. No way. Never again.	0
Very bad experience and lack of professional ethics with customer service personnel, they do not give correct information when buying their tickets. They say everything is included and in the long run an ok ends up paying for luggage. Bad coordination. They should put more professional and trained staff and take the trouble to serve the customer and not be on the phone talking more with other people and then attend to a 45-minute wait for a check-in is ridiculous and this happened to me in Mexico. Very bad if there were less than 0 is my evaluation I do not recommend it at all.  Muy mala experiencia y falta de ética profesional con personal de servicio al cliente, no dan una información correcta al momento comprar sus tickets. Dicen todo está incluido y a la larga un ok termina pagando equipaje. Mala coordinación. Deberían poner personal mas profesional y capacitado y se tomen la molestia de atender al cliente y no estar en el teléfono hablando más con otras personas y luego atenderlo a uno 45 minutos esperar por un check in es ridiculo y más esto me paso en México.  Muy malo si hubiera menos 0 es mi evaluación no la recomiendo para nada .	0
Aeromexico is stealing from customers by not refunding fully refundable tickets! It’s been 5 weeks since I cancelled my flight and I still do not have my $1600 back. I have asked 3 times to speak with a supervisor and the agent refuses. I also asked to talk to someone in the refund department and they told me that department doesn’t have a phone number! I have no confidence that I will ever get my money back.	0
Santorini to Athens. We had a very bad experience with Aegean Airlines. I bought two tickets and by right have combined baggage of 46kgs - however, when we dropped off our baggage, the staff told us Aegean don't combine baggage and charged us for excessive baggage charges although our actual bags combined only 43kgs. Also they dont accept one of our hand carry suitcase as well which have been travelled through so many airlines like Qatar and Swiss with no issues and charge us another baggage charges. Unless you want to be ripped off by this airlines otherwise I highly unrecommend Aegean because they will find all their ways to rip you.	0
Corfu to Skopje via Athens. On August 4, 2022, my husband and I were traveling from Corfu, Greece on Aegean 285 to Skopje, North Macedonia on Aegean 984 operated by Olympic. Upon arrival in Skopje we were informed our luggage had been lost. We filed a lost baggage report at the Skopje airport. Once in Skopje all we had was the clothes on our backs. We spent the first two days of our vacation milling around an unknown city trying to find clothing and personal items and dealing with Aegean Airlines dysfunctional bureaucracy. On August 10, 2022, we returned home to the States empty handed and no word from Aegean regarding our lost luggage. Our calls and emails went unanswered. 10 days later we finally received our luggage that was come how found in Austria. We filed a reimbursement claim for initial expenses accrued in Skopje, for personal items and clothing replacement. Once again no word from Aegean. I repeated this process 3 times to no avail. Aegean airlines is run by sociopaths. They pretend nothing happened on their watch and choose to ignore any problems that happen on their airline. Trust me when I say I am not the only one affected by these grifters.	0
They delayed our departing flight so we missed the flight to our final destination. They then booked us a new flight the next day at 7 am but in order to make the flight we had to take a bus at 5 am. For the inconvenience they provided a complimentary food voucher to use in Athens. When I tried using the voucher the funds were not applied. The cashier told me to go speak with an Aegean Airline employee. I then went to speak with an Aegean Airline help desk employee and due to our language barrier she did not understand what I was telling her so I never got the funds and had to buy my own meal.	0
Atrocious. +6 hour delays. Left stranded in the connecting airport due to the delay, causing us to miss our connecting flight. No customer assistance in getting to our final destination. Had to book my own alternate flight on my own dime. Awful customer service. Still haven't gotten my money back 2 months after the flight, despite all the airline people telling me I would be fully reimbursed while I was stranded. The planes are old with broken infotainment systems.	0
Absolutely disgusting airline. If I ever had to use them again I would sooner not go on holiday. Food not good. Lack of snacks, only soft drinks included, no wine List goes on. That’s before I start on the delays.	0
London to Dublin with Aer Lingus on July 09, 2022. Arrived in Dublin, no luggage to be found. Baggage area was utter chaos as dozens of people were searching for their luggage. Submitted online baggage claim forms as directed. No airline personnel around to assist anyone. Subsequently made clothing and personal item purchases....nothing extravagant, just enough to get through the week. Via e-mail was directed to screen shot receipts for reimbursement. Seven weeks later, reimbursed for less than half the amount and was informed via e-mail there was a minimum by law. Really? The amount was shameful, not to mention no reimbursement for lost items in luggage. It is now October 22, 2022. No further communication rom Aer Lingus electronically or by phone. I wrote a hand written letter to the airline customer vice president in Jericho, NY a month ago - no response, same to the V.P. in Dublin. No response. This, sadly, was the only overseas trip I have ever taken in my life and it was ruined. Aer Lingus simply doesn't give a damn about customers.	0
I booked and purchased tickets for an Aer Lingus trip in October 2021. BOS-SNN-LHR June 15 22 Returning from Paris CDG-DUB-BOS on June 28 22. The outward flights were uneventful. usual 30min delay in Boston, poor quality food in coach. I liked the new A321NEO to Shannon much more comfortable than the old 757. However the return was hell. We arrived at the counter at CDG to total chaos after waiting in line for an hour we got to to an agent a contractor (Swissport?) she told us we didn't have a reservation so I gave her our number she then said the BOS flight is cancelled. But I pointed out that the previous customer is on the same flight and they got passes for both flights. She then said our reservations were cancelled by Aer Lingus and we would have to make our own arrangements to get home. I asked for the duty Manager who told me the same thing and suggested I call customer service. I made her call customer service and she got us on a BA to LHR and AA to BOS the next day. But No hotel or meals. I had to find a hotel on my own using a tablet on airport wifi. When we got back I submitted a claim for EU261 Compensation with Aer Lingus on July 1 Ref #8333779. I got an Ack for this the next day and have heard nothing since although I have inquired of status several times by Email. eventually I got thru to someone who said they are still working on the issue and to expect to hear soon - this was on Sept 30-still waiting. I have a Vacation home in Kirush Clare Ireland So i guess I will be using Delta or Icelandair in future. In conclusion you have to be crazy to fly this airline. They are definitely nothing like the old Aer Lingus I loved flying.	0
We just had the most miserable experience with Air Caraibes and will never fly them again. On the trip from St. Maarten to Gaudeloupe via St. Barths they flew is to St. Barths then upon arrival we were told we had to return to St. Martin (Grande Case) and fly to Guadeloupe. No instructions as to how to make the transfer. On our flight from Guadeloupe to St. Barths we were flown first to St. Maarten again with no indication that we were not going directly to St. Barths until we boarded the plane. Then waited 3 hours in St. Maarten with no advice from the gate agents who would not even answer questions before being rushed onto a WinAir flight to St. Barths with 10 minutes notice.	0
Aeroflot changed my schedule from a 2hr transfer to a 14hr transfer overnight in Moscow airport. They did not contact me to let me know about this change and it was only luck that I logged in to check my seat selection that i saw it. I called to cancel and refund, which took them 2 weeks to even initiate after I contacted them again to check the status and I am awaiting this refund. Poor communication and customer service.	0
Gatwick to St. Petersburg. After years of having an extremely lax baggage policy, where they didn’t charge anything to check in the first bag, let excess kilos float through without comment, and never paid any attention to cabin bags, Aeroflot has done a complete U-turn. Now you have to pay for luggage in the hold (£36 per item) and they are applying zero tolerance for a few grams over and weighing hand-baggage, applying limits to the letter. My excess on the same amount of luggage I’ve travelled with for years came to £129, almost doubling the price of my ticket. It was extracted by the service staff, at times barely suppressing smiles. The baggage policy – or lack of one - was among the very few positives. I’ll be thinking long and hard when booking a flight to Russia next time.	0
Kuwait to Kathmandu via Sharjah. The staff in boarding pass counter were rude and didn’t issue my pass until it was 45 min for take off which mean I have to run. This much was fine but at the end of flight in Kathmandu when I collect my luggage i found it was damage and same time I fill up the form for the claim and after a week I got a reply saying I’ll be compensated half of the amount of the luggage. Then never hear from the baggage department. So all I can suggest is never use this airline. We pay for the flight which means we trust them for our bags and everything but all I can say is they doesn’t care. And I’m sure they really don’t care	0
Gatwick to Marrakech. Our flight was affected by the disruptions in Gatwick airport caused by drones. Understandable that unpredictable situations occur, but the way the airline company treated us was awful leaving us waiting on the plane for 7 hours without any water. Later and in the absence of any information we received an email from the company asking us to phone them. More than an hour on the phone at a charge of more than £50 and noone picked up. On top of that despite the company's representative informing us that we could get refund for the cost of the flight if we didn't fly with them and chose other means, the company now refuses to do so.	0
Cairo to Sharjah. When Air Arabia was first introduced as a low cost airline, i wouldn't complain much about quality and service given according to value for money. But that's not the case anymore, they are now charging same like official airlines which are giving much more better service and even sometimes charging more. low cost flights are now the exception as offers given every now & then same like everyone else. - Ground team i encountered least to say were rude. you feel like treated as a low cost traveller while you are actually not. Head of ground team was treating people very bad when arranging the bus to air craft from Cairo airport - No in flight entertainment whatsoever - Leg room is extremely small and you're always touching adjacent travellers which is making flight completely uncomfortable - people are fighting each other all the time because of reclining seat back (due to small leg room) and arm rests without interference of flight attendants - charging for meals & soft drinks - charging for baggage - flight attendants are not so friendly - Air craft smell was horrible all the time Bottom line, either review your fares or upgrade your service Wouldn't recommend and most probably won't fly it again.	0
Baku to Sharjah. The first time flying Air Arabia. I travel so much but no any other airlines given such bad treatment. They give us separate seats to my and my husband both way coming and going. I am lady sitting separated from husband and some unknown men was sitting to near me for whole journey. T We ask them to give same sit at registration counters but the staff was so bad. They are not supporting at all. I never fly with Air Arabia any more in future.	0
Bishkek to Kuala Lumpur via Almaty. Worst flight experience in 30 years! The flight was grounded unannounced by the pilot after a minor medical emergency of an elderly lady who had become unconscious in economy class and all +200 passengers were forced to evacuate at Turkmenistan airport and were left there for 15 hours with no water, no food and zero care, whilst the crew was relaxing and recovering in their hotel. The flight resumed after 15 hours with the same crew, whom I perceived as careless and unprofessional.  For one unconscious lady passenger, more than 200 were left stranded. Needles to say we lost our connection flights (different airline) in Kuala Lumpur and were forced to pay. This was the first and last time I took Air Astana and so will be my associated, family and friends.	0
Terrible experience and terrible service. Its overpriced flights, for a direct 6H flight from Hong Kong to Almaty i paid 1700USD! For this price during the flight we didnt have TV, worked only 1 toilet, can you imagine the toilet condition, it was disgusting! Food was terrible and stewardess completely ignored when i asked for water at list 5 times. I was flying back from Almaty to Hong Kong with the stop at Beijing. When I was doing check-in at Almaty airport at Air Astana counter, as i have Nomad Club and its automatically set request window seat when i buy an online ticket, a representative from Air Astana said, they don't know why it doesn't work and they don't have time to check what is the problem. They gave me only one boarding pass, however, did check in to my baggage directly to HK. Air Astana representative said i don't need a China visa as only 2H transit and boarding pass they will give me at Beijing transit, as it was 5 AM flight transit counter was closed. i couldn't go through immigration as I don't have Chinese visa. I almost missed my flight, luckily because i been crying for 2H at immigration desk, the lady at immigration helped me and wrote on a piece of paper my boarding pass, to let me go through immigration so i can go to different Terminal where was my flight to HK. I arrived to HK my baggage was lost! I emailed and called to Air Astana the same date when I arrived in HKG, they promised to find my baggage as soon as possible and study my case with their terrible service, it was one week since Air Astana baggage department finally contacted me. Plus my suitcases arrived broken!	0
Almaty to Seoul. The flight was delayed because of technical issues and this affected our travel plans, which ended up emptying our pockets because we had rearrange our following flights that were following. We wrote a letter to Air Astana 6-7 times requiring the compensation. We sent the invoice of our expenses, that we received from Vietnam representatives as a check of payment. Air Astana told us that invoice is not a valid document for compensation. We talked to Vietnam partner again, and received a letter from them stating that invoice document they gave us earlier serves as a check of payment in Vietnam and they can only provide the invoice document in their country. We forward this letter to AirAstana and never got response. Terrible client relationship. For two months I can not get my money back, not talking about the time value of money.	0
Aeromexico didn't tell me about the visa when I checked in, then I lost the flight because Oficina sent me back and forth. I had to pay an exaggerated new ticket of 2500 euros. A return flight from Mexico to Germany. My luggage is gone too, I'll probably never see it again. Partly very rude how you are treated, no advice and no help. Somehow even foreigners Hostile. I speak spanish but not perfect. I will never fly with Aeromexico again because they ripped it off badly. A short phone call was enough in their own ranks to help me,  Aeromexico hat mich beim Einchecken nicht auf dass Visa hingewiesen,dann habe ich den Flug verloren ,weil dass Oficina mich hin und her geschickt hat. Ein übertriebenes neues Ticket von 2500 Euro musste ich bezahlen. Ein Rückflug von Mexiko nach Deutschland. Mein Gepäck ist auch verschwunden,werde es wohl nie wieder sehen. Zum Teil sehr unverschämt wie man behandelt wird,keine Beratung und keine Hilfe. Irgendwie sogar Ausländer Feindlich. Ich rede Spanisch,aber nicht perfekt. Ich werde nie mehr mit Aeromexico fliegen,denn sie haben kräftig übers Ohr gehauen. Ein kurzes Telefonat hatte ausgereicht in ihren eigenen Reihen um mir zu helfen	0
Highly recommend putting a lock/zip tie on your luggage. I packed my girlfriends brand new shoes in my luggage before we left and our bags weren’t there when we arrived at our resort. The people told us we’d get the luggage in two hours, we got them the next day. Also opened my luggage to missing shoes.	0
I flew with Aeromexico both ways going to Peru, and both legs of the flight I lost my baggage. The first one I was able to receive after 2 days, but the coming back flight it's already been a week and haven't received it yet. They've located it but keeps pending and not sending it to me.	0
I couldn't believe there was only 1 working bathroom with over 150 passengers and also every flight was asked if I would like a beverage I said a coke and after she opened the can she asked for a 2.50 payment. I was under the impression that beverages were complimentary since I paid 1500$ for this flight. Terrible airline and service.	0
Checked in both of us for our flight the next day via the app. No issues obtaining my husband's boarding pass, however for some reason mine was completely inaccessible both on the app and website, and the agents available via Chat on the Aer Lingus website may as well just be bots, given they clearly just copy/paste template excuses rather than actually making any means of an attempt to help customers. No semblance of an explanation or effort given to help, whatsoever. Now when we get to the airport in the morning we'll be forced to wait in the check-in line for absolutely no good reason in addition to all of the others. Way to punish a paying customer for your own site and mobile app's shortcomings, Aer Lingus customer service is trash.	0
Worst Airline I have ever traveled with. I travel extensively internationally and have seen it all. They left 45 minutes late due to baggage loading issues (no other explanation provided). Our connecting flight from Dublin to Edinburgh was delayed by 1 hour no explanation provided. Our bags never arrived - they somehow were sent to London! The luggage counter in Edinburgh is not manned - it’s subcontracted out to another company who makes you fill out a form but no one seems to know what next! Finally figured out a web based link for reporting missing bags etc. when we landed in Dublin from an overnight flight from Philadelphia no breakfast/tea or coffee was served! I won’t travel Aer Fungus even if were free. No respect/accommodation for passengers - avoid at any cost.	0
I had to cancel my tickets and I have not received any refund, though I was promised an 85% refund. I have to wait two or three hours on hold for their customer service staff. After the long wait, I receive no real information about the status of my refund. I was told that it will take two weeks to receive the refund. Another time I was told that it will four to six weeks. It have been 9 weeks since I cancelled my tickets. The last time I contacted Aer Lingus customer service, I was promised that the "refund team" would contact me via email within 24 hours. That did not happen. I have requested the refund using the Aer Lingus web site also. No one has acknowledged that my request has been received.	0
Delayed bags and terrible customer service.  First and last time I will ever fly Aer Lingus. Medication‘s in the bag they’ve supposedly been out for delivery for two days but nobody can give me any real information because the folks are in call centers in Asia. I’m solo traveling I don’t have my medication I’m supposed to check out today and take a train to another country so now I don’t know whether to spend my own money to stay wait for my bag of course getting refunds for any of this is probably going to be impossible. Do yourself a favor learn from my mistake and spend more for a better airline	0
Malé to Zurich via Moscow and missed my connection flight. We arrived just 40 minutes late at Moscow where I was supposed to get my connection flight to Zurich. Usually staff will help you if there is little time to reach the next flight which you booked together as one ticket with the same airline. There was two counters with staff, apart from that, no one to find. By the time I could make someone talking to me, my flight already left and they didnt care about it and I was stuck with other passengers in the transfer area. They left me without information and a little food voucher I couldnt even afford proper food with. I started running around the airport, trying to find someone who could give me any information or at least a place to sleep. I waited for more than 5 hours at the airport until I managed to get information. I had to wait for 15 hours.	0
I flew from IAD to TLV via SVO on April 15th, arriving on April 16th. 2 out of the 4 bags I checked didn't make it (along with many other bags from other passengers that were all making claims at the same time that I was. It took 8 days to finally get my bags (my trip was only 12 days long). During those 8 days I sent emails, faxes and called the airline and lost baggage service (Q.A.S) multiple times and never received any responses. The only reply I got from them was due to a Facebook message I sent, which explained I need to contact the airline directly, not through their FB page. On April 24th I decided to go to the airport and look for my bags myself. They claimed my bags were not there, but I begged to check on my own and was finally allowed. Well, they were sitting right there in their storage room! It seems that when the bags finally made it on a flight, they had new tags put on - meaning the airline would have never found my bags, since they were searching for my old tag number. When no one claimed the bags, instead of searching their system to look for my claim, they issued a new claim to the case even though my name was on the baggage tag! Now, I flew back the same route arriving 4 days ago (TLV, SVO, IAD) and 3 of my 5 bags checked are missing! They claim it was due to a short stopover, but I had a 14 hour stopover! It is going to take 8 days for my bags to arrive as Aerolflot only has 1 flight a week that flies this route.	0
Male to Moscow. The food was terrible for me, the blanket looked used and dirty. It was possible to use the entertainment only a lot of time after the take of and they give you the headphones later. The dinner was served a lot of time after the departure in and they take so much time to bring you the drinks that you already have finished to eat.	0
Ras Al Khaima to Lahore. I have been frequent flyer of Air Arabia. It used to be a good airline. With passage of time, it service has gone extremely poor. First time in my 25 years of traveling I was called back from immigration and my lap top weight was included in the hand carry. It exceed few kilo. I was forced to remove my laptop. I left my bag in the car and travelled. The duty manager did not listen to my request. In fact a smile on his face showed how much non professional people this airline hires. It was worst traveling experience of my life.	0
Sharjah to Goa. This was one of the worst experience. Me my husband and my daughter were travelling from Sharjah to Goa in the month of June. They were supposed to check the baggage weight during the boarding process. No one asked us about the hand baggage weight. After the immigration was completed, the officer stopped us while going towards the gate and said they want to recheck our hand baggage. We had already weighed our luggage in the local  office in Abu Dhabi and they had informed us that the hand luggage is within the limit as they would not check the laptop bags. The ground officer checked our hand baggage, laptop bag, yy Purse and my daughter's laptop bag. He said we have 12 KGs excess bag. Straight away he took the boarding pass and gave to the other officer where there was already a big rush of passengers negotiating on money the officers were asking them to pay in cash, we were asked to pay AED 400.  I refused to pay anything for the 2 laptop bags and my vanity bag. They made me and my family stand there for about 1/2 an hour and finally, they negotiated to excuse us if we are paying 100 AED. The worst situation I would not want to travel through this airline again. They are only cheap in service and costly in price.	0
On February 28th, 2022 I purchased three airline tickets from a third party to fly on Aeromexico. One for me, one for my husband and one for my daughter. On April 10, Aero Mexico changed our flights. The change of the flight did not work for my daughter. So I had to cancel her flight and re book by calling Aeromexico. Which they charge me extra for her new flight. They did not let me daughter on the plane with this ticket. They said it was fraud since I was not at the airport with her to show my ID since I purchased it with my credit card. They told her the flight is full and she can not buy a ticket. Twos hours back and forth with them they told her they have a seat for her which she has to pay for. So they cancel her first flight without telling us and the same thing happen for her flight coming back. I will never fly with them again!! If anyone ask me about AeroMexico Ill will definitely tell them not to fly with them! I'm still waiting for my money back!	0
Terrible service. Mean and unkind employees. Left me waiting 46 minutes to find a wheelchair. Doesn’t have enough staff to operate wheelchair or check everyone in. Horrible food.	0
Lines of an hour and a half to be able to check the luggage, more than 35 minutes of waiting to be able to get off the plane and take my connection to my country, delayed flights and consequently loss of connections with themselves. Staff unable to provide support and solutions. They play with people's time because of their lack of competence. The supervisors will try not to compensate you and after receiving 20 people with the same case they redirect you to schedule your new flight. They send you to the furthest hotel (50 min) and are inflexible in giving you an alternative. An incredible lack of empathy, attention and service! It is the worst airline.  Filas de una hora y media para poder chequear el equipaje, más de 35 minutos de espera para poder bajar del avión y tomar mi conexión hacia mi país, retrasó de vuelos y en consecuencia pérdida de las conexiones con ellos mismos. Personal incapacitado para brindar soporte y soluciones. Juegan con el tiempo de las personas por su falta de competencia. Los supervisores intentarán no compensarte y luego de recibir a 20 personas con el mismo caso te redireccionan para programar tu nuevo vuelo. Te envían al hotel más lejano (50 min) y son inflexibles en darte una alternativa. Una falta de empatía increíble, de atención y servicio! Es la peor aerolínea	0
Aeromexico just kicked us out of the plane right at the plane door, eventually, we are done boarding check and have a ticket on hand. It’s unbelievable! Our flight from Mexico City to Vancouver on July 3, 2022 , flight number Am694, we are a couple. The flight was supposed to take off at 1:30 am July 3 but they delayed until 6 am. It means we already waited here for 4,5 hours - the whole night for the flight. At the boarding time, they just pulled us back and said that they need to check our passports, so we had to wait at the boarding station for 10 mins for their checking. We didn't know what they were doing, then we were released for heading to the plane. When we were about to get into the plane, right in front of the plane door, one of the staff just stopped us and said that he need to check if there were available seats for us. We did our check-in 14 hours ago and we got a ticket here, we got the seat number here and you did the checking, what do u mean u need to check if there were available seats for us. We waited there for another 10 mins and they just shut the plane door, right in front of us, left us there and the plane took off. We were so shocked by what was happening and couldn't believe what they did. The manager came and said that there was an error in our reservation so they could not let us board the plane. They will transfer us to the next flight without any other explanation. And we had to wait here another 3 hours for the next flight. They gave us business class tickers for the next flight but we didn't need them, we had been in the airport for 11 hours already and we will have to be back to work right after the flight. When we backed to the boarding station, they already issued new tickets and already took our check-in luggage out of the plane. We guessed that they took our seats and gave them to ppl who missed their last flight or whatever. We didn't know the real reason. Aeromexico, they just shut the plane door in front of us, left us there, and took off. Wow! We were so shocked and mad at what was happening. The reason they gave us is a reservation error, the machine couldn't read our ticket Q-code. That was not our false and they checked our passport twice, which means if there was something wrong they should have known abt it. They just did it to us for an unacceptable reason and didn’t care about if we accept it or not. Such a terrible experience! This is my first time with AeroMexico and also will be the last time. You never know the feeling until they do it to you! Hopefully, my sharing can let u consider not booking this airline - a terrible service!	0
Lost my luggage 3 days ago, no call from Aegean or airport. Holiday ruined. We had to re-buy all our clothes again as they made us check in even our cabin luggage.	0
The worst ground service of my life. They took away my carry on guitar. Then, instead of giving it to me at the gate, as they were supposed to do, they lost the guitar by sending it through the conveyor belts when I had to take a connecting flight. Then, they lost both of my suitcases. I have not been able to contact anyone from the airline, even though I have been calling and emailing daily for 4 months. I am tired of dealing with their lack of customer support.	0
Worst customer service ever. My flight from BHX to DUB was cancelled due to system crash on Sept 10, so I also missed my connection back to America. At the airport we were told to leave (after hours of them continuing to add another one-hour delay). There were no Aer Lingus employees at the airport by then (they left when the computers crashed). No help, no hotel voucher, no re-book assist, etc. It was impossible to get through on their phone line. I paid out of pocket for another airline to get me home (someone at the airport said you could book on own and they would reimburse). 2 emails to Aer Lingus for refund and still no reply.	0
Because of the current horrible airline situation world wide, we cancelled our flight to Ireland, England and Scotland. We didn't want to get stuck because of cancelled flights. I called a month prior to our flight to cancel. I was told I would get a voucher for the value of the tickets good for five years. I understood a refund couldn't be offered because I didn't purchase a refundable ticket. The voucher was fine. The agent checked the timing of the cancellation and said it was well within the period necessary to receive a voucher. I was also told that I would be after my flight was originally schedule before someone could get back to me since they were very busy. I received the following email confirming the refund. Dear Mrs. Ruppert, Our sincere apologies for the delayed response. Your voucher request was approved however, we do not currently have the ability to redeem vouchers for travel on other airlines, and your original ticket included travel on A A Airlines. As a courtesy, until this is remedied, we will offer a refund. Kindly reply to this email to confirm if you would like to proceed with the refund, thank you. Kind regards, Customer Service Agent. Now Aer Lingus refuses to provide the voucher they promised in the confirmation email. My next vacation will not be to Ireland.	0
Florence to London via Dusseldorf in September 2017. First flight from Florence delayed by 3 hours, resulting in missed connection. This wouldn't have been an issue, especially considering the airline was meant to reimburse all customers for costs of the delay. However, my checked baggage was misplaced. Again, this wouldn't have been an issue under normal circumstances. I spoke to the baggage handler who told me to come talk to him prior to the next mornings flight, which was due to leave at 6am. I was forced to pay for a taxi which totalled 100 Euro each way (with promises of reimbursement) to the hotel which the company had placed passengers in only to stay there for 4 hours before having to leave again to catch the rescheduled flight. When I went to see the baggage handler I wasn't able to find anyone in the department. I went to the Air Berlin help desk and after explaining the situation to the woman at the desk she said there was nothing she could do. I asked if she was able to call the person who handled baggage as I needed to put my checked luggage on the new flight and she said she could but wasn't going to. When I asked again, saying "Please, I need to catch my flight on time. I can't wait for someone to answer me knocking at the door, my flight leaves in less than an hour and I have to go through security" She promptly said to me (in these exact words) "Why don't you just do everyone a favour and go away." I flew to my destination sans baggage and deeply offended. Being under 19 years old at the time and a solo flyer I am to this day outraged by the lack of sympathy and understanding of the customer support team. I had to wait 4 whole weeks for my luggage to arrive at my final destination. The airline owes me over 500 Euros in reimbursement, which it has managed to avoid paying due to their own fiscal troubles. I hope this airline is never resurrected and that no one is treated like that in there travels.	0
Phuket to Amsterdam via Moscow. I had chosen a day flight with a 1H20 connection in Moscow. But after online check-in i noticed the scheduled departure time had changed which eventually lead to a 14 hour delay. Ticket was booked 5 months in advance. Even as member of their frequent flyer program, I wasn't notified and there was no way for me knowing of this change until it was to late.	0
Bangalore to Moscow via Sharjah. The total fare was not at all low for the low coster + I had to pay extra for the luggage what is not mentioned while booking and I decided to pre-book my food on 2 international flights. In first place ground staff wanted to offer me middle seat, I had to pursue the ground staff for the seat. The crafts are  really dirty same as the Sharja airport where they land for transfer. Flight attendants are the least bothered about your needs, they just don't care. I requested flight attendants both flights to try change my uneatable meal for something else, but they refused.  Worst of the worst.	0
Marrakesh to Paris. The only airline that allows no personal bag, and makes you check small baggage and then charge you 50 USD for the abuse. No leg room, knees get crushed if over 6ft (182cm) maybe not the worst 3.5 hours of my life, but top 10. I wish that they were in my home country so I could avoid purposely ever using them again, sadly they are not.	0
I would avoid it at all costs. They are very disorganized, all 4 of our flights were randomly delayed, and we ended up losing a business class seat that we paid for and they never refunded us. No one from customer support is responsive, they lie and ignore your emails and questions.	0
On May 16, 2022, I purchased 4 airline tickets from Aeromexico for myself and my family. In less than 24 hours, we had to cancel those flights. When we called to cancel, we were assured that a full refund would be issued in 7-10 business days. After that time frame, we called again. We were given confirmation numbers of the cancellation, the refund amount and again assured that a refund would be issued within 2 weeks. We called again after the two weeks and were told that the refund was already issued and my bank must be holding it. I work at the bank and knew this to be false information but I called the bank anyway for due diligence. The bank assured me that no refund was being held and there were no pending deposits. So, I called again! This time we were told that the refund was issued and would hit our bank within 3-4 weeks. Now, we are at 36 days and counting. This is incredibly unprofessional and frustrating. We receive a different response every time we call. The only consistency is that we are told the refund is issued. The total amount is $1458.07. They've given us this number several times. That is a lot of money to be held interest free for over a month.	0
Not worth it. An overpriced piece of garbage of an airline. The airline sells itself as being above the other way more economical airlines. The reality is that you’ll be delayed on every step of your journey, the staff will be rude and overall they don’t care about getting you on time anywhere. My flight was delayed in Amsterdam and then canceled in Mexico City. I have to wait 5 hours for my next flight. Ah and also my screen on my seat was broken. I truly regret paying for a 'nicer' airline. If you can avoid it don’t fly with them.	0
This is and was the worst airline I've ever flown! Our flight is 4 hours late and counting. They gave us noticed for the flight change when we were checking in to the flight and again when supposed to board at the later time. They promised to give us 600 pesos redemption for any food (except alcohol) at the restaurant. As soon as we got there they said that the coupon was only good for only one type of sandwich and a coke. Check-in bags are super overpriced and we are overall extremely dissatisfied with Aeromexico! Just terrible! We will never fly with them again.	0
After an extremely inappropriate delay of the flight, the boarding procedure was unbearably slowly conducted by the airline employees. Extensive waiting for the bus transport from gate to the aircraft and then 20 minutes of waiting in the aircraft for no reason .	0
Worst experience I’ve ever had flying. Lost bags on the flight from Athens to Rome. It’s been about a week now and we still have no luggage. It’s cost us money, time and stress and Aegean don’t reply to emails or answer phones to update us.	0
Never again. I fly every week & I'm not using this airline again. My 3.20pm flight has still not left & it is now 5.36pm. The engines have not started up yet & the communications have been appalling on the continued delays all afternoon! I had booked assistance, and stupidly thought, it would not be required as it’s such a short flight. I’m now in agony, very stressed & not so much as an apology from the Airline. I’ll be taking my regular business travel elsewhere.	0
Geneva to Dublin. Airline's IT systems went down and I was left 9 hours in the airport with zero updates from the company or staff. Was eventually accommodated in a 4 star hotel nearby at midnight but extremely poor service and I will be flying with Ryanair in the future. I had to book a flight home the next day for 200euro with another airline but still haven't been compensated for anything.	0
When changing this flight from its original booking I had a problem with the price of the rebooked flight. Their advertising states no change fees. This was not true. I decided to call customer service to resolve the issue. After waiting on hold for 3 hours I gave up and went the chat bot route. Really slow and after 6 hours of basically giving them my details, PNR etc I got a message to call customer service again - after a couple of hours on hold I managed to speak to the agent and explained my issue. He was no help and when I said I wasn’t happy with his answer which was the opposite of their website info, he hung up. On the flight they ran out of meals. When I suggested they get me something from business class the answer was a flat no. I will never use Aer Lingus again for any route out of Dublin where I live and will use alternative airlines. Aer Lingus has fallen a long long way and has all the characteristics of the very worst budget airlines. A real shame for a once great airline!	0
Berlin to Prague. Worst experience I’ve had for a while! They announce 2 hour delay, then no info until we understand that once they have a plane they must wait for a new crew. Very bad organisation and communication. Definitely avoid if you can, lost my time and couldn’t make my meetings.	0
Berlin to Warsaw. This is worst experience I had. Staff are really rude. They don't have enough information about flight. I had three different information last 10 minutes. I have been waiting for my flight over 2 hours and flight is delayed. And Airberlin's staff still can't give any information about flight.  I don't recommend it at all.	0
Marrakesh to Frankfurt. Never again: 3 hr delay and finally touch down in Hahn instead of FRA (120 KM away = 1,5 h bus drive). We got this information after arrival even though this was already planned before take-off in Marrakesh (the customs officers in Hahn told us!). My sister was waiting for hours at FRA-airport and she was seriously worried, because she didn´t get any update of this flight. They even switched off the TV screen with our position on the map during the last hour. And no explanation or serious excuse for all this trouble! no further comment and never again we will book this airline!	0
Colombo to Kiev via Sharjah. We had planned flight on January 26th 2018, at 4:55am. Air Arabia had an hour delay, so we took off at 5:55am from Colombo to Sharjah. In this time in Sharjah appeared a fog, and we landed at 10:53am in Sharjah and Air Arabia staff members told us that our flight to Kiev took off and we had to stay in Shajrah one day more. We checked our flight to Kiev and we know that this plane took off at 10:38am, so we don’t know why Air Arabia couldn’t stop this flight 15 minutes more. Air Arabia didn’t it, ok, but we had in this same day (26 January) booked flight from Kiev to Poland, we had booked hotel in Poznan and we had booked bus from Poznan to Wroclaw because this is our living place. We told about ours reservations to Air Arabia staff and they said that we must spend one day in Sharjah but next day we will have flight to Kiev and then when we were in Kiev, some person from Air Arabia company will give us airline tickets from Kiev to Poland. Air Arabia staff provided us that we will got a ticket to Poland most certainly. In the same day we checked some flight from Kiev to Poland and we had flight to Wroclaw for 150 PLN for one person, but Air Arabia company provided us that bought airline ticket for us, so we only checked flight options. The next day 27th January when we were waiting at the gate at flight to Kiev after the security control someone form AirArabia looking for us, with whom We went to the Transfer Desk and once again confirmed that we will have a transfer from Kiev to Poland. When we arrived to Kiev, an employee of AirArabia first said he did not know the case, later he told that he knows something, but he cannot help us.  If we will know that Air Arabia company fails us in Kiev, or if Air Arabia staff will told us 26th that they can’t buy ticket for us, we will buy cheaper airlines ticket to Wroclaw on 26th January for 150 PLN. In Kiev, we were left without any help, and the employees of AirArabia behaved very rude. We had to buy more expensive airline ticket to Poland.	0
Montpellier to Casablanca. I've had the worst flight of my life. First there was a total lack of communication and customer care. Secondly they lied to us when when we were about to land in casablanca, by saying that the airport Mohammed V was closed, and that we had to wait in Rabat airport to replenish the fuel. in fact it was not closed but there was evident technical problems in the airplane. And finally, they didn't even offer some water to apologize for delaying us by 2 hours and for the other inconveniences	0
I purchased a business class ticket for Sunday with a return on Friday from Medellin Colombia to San Antonio, Texas, USA. I had the times confused with 12:30 am being at night and I figured out my mistake, luckily it was the afternoon and the flight was delayed but while I was at the airport I was held up and was late for the first flight. Not only was my first flight missed, but Aeromexico also canceled my second flight for no show. I had to rebook my flight for Personal instead of Business (it was a full flight) and that flight on Friday was over 3 hours late. We were supposed to leave at 6:15 pm but ended up leaving at 9:30 pm. I can understand missing my first flight, I got confused between 12:30 am and 12:30 pm and when I realized my mistake I arrived a little too late. I understand this, but then my second flight was canceled and Aeromexico was 3+ hours late on their flight return flight and also very late on their flight out that I missed and thought was Sunday night, not Saturday afternoon. I accept missing the first flight but I would have liked my 2nd flight to be refunded. It was a full flight so there was no money lost on Aeromexico's end and in fact, I paid more for the second flight. I don't feel it's fair that the airline canceled my second flight even though I flew out of Medellin a few hours later and rebooked the same ticket through you the same day. It feels very unfair I get punished so heavily for being late but when Aeromexico is late on both flights there is no issue on their end. I've been a very good customer, I have only been late to a flight one other time in my life. I am totally okay with losing the first flight but feel it is very unfair to lose my 2nd flight, especially since the return flight was full,  the outgoing and return flight was very late (3+ hours), I booked the same flight twice, the second booking was more expensive than the first, and the second ticket wasn't business class.  Their communication is the absolute worst! I have called numerous times, the chat on their website doesn't work, and I have emailed them 3 times in the past month with zero response. I would really appreciate a refund on my second flight or at least airline credit because again Aeromexico didn't lose any money (in fact it made more since I booked the same flight twice for more expensive) and I arrived home very late last night.	0
AM0025 to Amsterdam was supposed to leave at 22:10. What followed over the next three hours as we waited in the aircraft were repeated announcements of imminent departures in 5, max ten minutes, the last time at 23:25. At 00:12, we were informed that our departure would be transferred to a different, shorter, runways which would require us to first reduce some mail tonnage and we should not expect to take off for the next 25 minutes. I think this was the only announcement during the whole flight. At 00:21 at least the stewardesses decided to show themselves offering passengers a glass of water, basically the least they could do. At 1:00, the mail truck arrived to remove the excess mail baggage. Eventually pushback started at 1:15, and flight finally took off at 1:35. After that service was friendly and consistently in Spanish, despite me consistently indicating that I didn't speak Spanish. Luckily I managed to get some sleep, but when I awoke I found that the entertainment system had frozen. I just read my book for the remainder of this awful flight. No more Aeromexico for me ever again.	0
I had a business flight to the USA from MX in January. They canceled my flight on Monday and rebooked me for Tuesday. I get there on Tuesday, they cancel my flight again. I believe it was due to low staff and people getting COVID. Fine. I guess I just will not go, it was suppose to be for 3 days total anyway. I asked for a refund at the desk, they said I have to call. I call, they said I have to send an email. Five months later, after multiple tickets being sent in, they finally responded about my refund. They said that they cannot offer a refund because it was due to weather conditions, I'm pretty sure it wasn't, according to what the front desk told me.  Late response. No refund.	0
I’d rather walk or swim to my destination than fly with this  company again. Hidden fees, a totally incompetent staff, subpar food and inflight service. One attendant didn’t care that I had my allotted 2 carry on bags, another charged me $93 dollars to check one of them even though the weight and size was okay. It’s no wonder they went bankrupt. Just pay the extra and fly a different airline unless you enjoy getting bent over.	0
To include an extra hand luggage I had to pay +20% on the fare. Checking in I weighed my luggage, it was 1.2kg above. I was forced to give it to the hold and not allowed to remove a jumper from my luggage to my backpack. A checked in luggage would have been cheaper than the upgrade I paid for.  This is my worst travel experience in 2022.	0
For two extra kilos you made me pay 40e. ‌I was flying Aegean Air from Thessaloniki to Athens today (flight A3 111) with economy/light ticket, which includes only one cabin bag of 8kilos. I did forget about this, and came to the airport with my cabin bag and a laptop backpack. After weighting my cabin bag, Aegean stuff said it was 10 kilos, I was allowed 8kg and only one luggage. I said I can put the backpack in the cabin bag, but they refused as this would make it heavier. They clearly didn't want to help me and actually told to to hurry up and pay the fine or I would miss the flight, as people were boarding. I later thought that I could have easily taken out my heavy jacket and trainers - I was wearing flip flops, and make my cabin bag much lighter, so with my laptop it would be a bit over 8 kilos. Very, very disappointing Aegean Air.	0
Scheduled to fly to Rome on September 13, 2022, with my wife in business class. unfortunately, on September 8, 2022, I was diagnosed with COVID. I notified the airline and was told I could either obtain a voucher or get a credit refund. I opted for a credit refund. however, even after submitting a claim with my covid results, I was denied the full refund of $8300. Their reason of course was that i did not cancel prior to the 14 days requirement. Obviously if I knew I would come down with COVID I would have cancelled with the 14day requirement being met. However, I could not have known I would contract covid less than 1 week before the flight. I find the very quick response denying my full refund to be an absolute bureaucratical decision, without any thought process being given to the extreme circumstances. I returned their email asking the person, if they would prefer that I travelled on their aircraft knowing that i had covid. to date I have not had a response. Terrible customer service skills and a terrible decision. They will now refund the $8300 minus 15% admin fees. Guess who will never use Aer Lingus again.	0
Worst airline ever, poor customer care. Representatives are rude and not helpful. My flight from San Francisco to Prague (with only one connection stop) was cancelled without any notification and explanation as to why. Air Berlin representative was not helpful at all. We were told that we would be flying via a different airline, however, didn't give any information regarding flight number, refused to print any documents proving that we had the new flight with a different airline. In addition, they gave us a flight with two stops (we could have find tickets much cheaper with two stops). Do not recommend this airline, they just lost two customers. On my way back another Air Berlin representative was extremely rude, plus she overcharged us for overweight luggage (we had to pay 100 euros for 27 kg luggage). On the board they didn't offer any drinks (water or coffee) from Prague to Berlin.	0
Bonn to Prague via Berlin. Absolutely bad experience. I bought flight at 5pm from Berlin and instead they put me on flight at 9pm. Nobody was able to explain me why. After staying in line for almost an hour to actually talk with someone they tell me that I have flight for today so they don't understand why is my problem - if they would tell me up front that the flight at 5pm will not happen I would fly directly from Bonn to Prague at 7 pm. These people are cheating their customers.	0
Saint-Petersburg to Rome. It was -10 degrees outside and they kept people in a bus with open doors until it gets full to get to a plane. Even though, the plane was fully packed the bus made just 2 races. When bus arrived to the plane people had to wait outside the plane cause they were checking boarding passes for the third time in a row.	0
Miami to Kaliningrad via Moscow. I've been flying Aeroflot for Years. Love the service, very pleasant crew, Always helpful. Customer service phone line is easily accessible but not helpful at all. This last flight the airline charged my debit card twice for one booking and now it has been almost a month since I contacted them, I filled many different forms but no-one contacted me back and I don't have and answer whether they are going to refund my $900 or not. Very Frustrating!! Will review my rating after I solve the problem accordingly.	0
I flew Marrakech to Fez with my wife and had an absolutely horrible customer service experience. I had to pay 40 euros to put our cabin baggage (truly under 10 Kg) in the hold, although it was clearly stated on the website that I was allowed both cabin baggage and an additional underseat bag. Later I saw people boarding the same flight with both of these items. I asked the lady at the customer service desk attending to us in how is she allowing others and on what basis were we picked, she was rude and unhelpful. I have never been treated worse by any airline in all my years of travelling. I would never ever use Air Arabia Marocco again, one more dissatisfied customer to your list, keep the good work with your efficient and well trained staff.	0
Marrakech to Frankfurt. Got the information that the flight will be delayed by 3.5 hrs at a time when the flight should actually already have started. It didn't go to the planned destination (Frankfurt) but to Hahn - a 1.5 hrs bus drive away from Frankfurt. But the worst was the handling: Only after 2 hours of insisting and talking to the responsible person the passengers got a voucher to buy some food or drinks - with the value of 5 Euro! Finally arrived in Frankfurt 6 hours delayed at 2am in the night. No connecting trains. No compensation from the airline offered, and it can't be enforced because the airline is not under EU law. Avoid this airline whenever you can!	0
Flew Marrakech to London Gatwick. Absolutely appalling. I had to pay 50 euros to put my cabin baggage in the hold, although it was clearly stated on the website that I was allowed both cabin baggage and an additional underseat bag. I later saw people boarding the same flight with both of these items. The woman at the customer service desk was rude and unhelpful, I have never been treated worse by any airline in all my years of travelling. I would never use Air Arabia Maroc again even if you paid me. Avoid at all costs.	0
Worst company ever. They didn’t show the whole the safety video before the flight, and it was not possible to buy even water on the plane when you fly from Morocco to Sweden. I had Moroccan currency, Swedish currency and credit card, but the only payment the accept was euro. So they took my water and my sandwich and I had a 7 hour flight without water.	0
I wanted to get a refund for a flight that I didn't take in January. Informed Air Astana in advance that I won't be able to travel. Asked to transfer my money back to another bank account as the old one was already closed. After three months of slow feedback, collecting all necessary papers by myself, contacting my previous bank in Asia, this company stopped answering my emails. But the strangest thing happened when they transferred my money to Cambodia, though I live in Ukraine. Though they said that "your refund is in process", now they just don't answer at all.	0
Flight from LAX was delayed so they rebooked us on a flight 8 hours later. Asked and denied our request to be rebooked on a partner airline in order to make connection. All the agents at Lax were delta air. Literally took hours to rebook as they’re unfamiliar with Aeromexico booking policy. At Mexico city, had to to wait another 13 hours for connection. Made us pick up our checked luggage, then refused drop off because departure flight was more than 6 hours away. Food was also terrible. Economy food might have been better. Got a fairly decent deal for this flight. But will never fly them again no matter how good of a deal again. Not surprised this flagship airline is only the third largest in Mexico.	0
Start great, get people in the plane, little late but nothing crazy (10min). Shortly after everyone is in it start to be really hot, 45 min later we got told to unboard the plane due to mechanical, no more announcement, everybody know they gonna miss their connection. But AeroMexico tell everyone that everything is fine We will replane the aircraft shortly (but don’t know went) and everything will be taking care of in Mexico City. 1 hour later, We all know we miss our connection basically. Basically land around 4pm… In Mexico City We got information in the plane, for me that was to present myself at gate 62. Run to the gate, there was no one there. Try to find a place to sort my stuff because again knowing that everyone was late, and waiting in Guadalajara, why not make it there.  Finally after 3 hour in line, finally talk to a person, Get another flight at 1am. No refund on my upgrade I made on the flight I miss ‘cause no more seats. And a beautiful 350 pesos vouchers for Starbucks. Avoid at all cost please, they are just not professional.	0
Torreón to San Jose del Cabo via Mexico City. Why pay Aeromexico prices for budget airline treatment? Unbelievably terrible treatment from Aeromexico. We were flying from Torreón to San Jose del Cabo via Mexico City arrived in Mexico City to find out that they had over overbooked the next flight by more than 16 people. We were kicked off the flight, stranded in Mexico City with the next available flight not until 7am the next day (aka waking up at 3am). Because they had overbooked ALL the flights for today. Then we wait in customer service lines for over an hour just to get rebooked. I get that overbooking happens but more than a dozen of us paying customers who made reservations FAR in advance should not be treated like cattle. Families with children, elderly people, all stranded. This is criminal behavior. We paid for a flight with convenient arrival and departure times, and instead are receiving a cheap early AM flight. And worst of all, not even a single "we're sorry." We will be avoiding Aeromexico at all costs if you're gonna be treated like livestock anyway, might as well go with a cheaper airline.	0
I had a flight from Cancun to Los Cabo’s with a connection in Mexico City. Mexico City airport is a disaster! We were 30 minutes late leaving Cancun then right before we were to land in Mexico City the plane went in circles for 15 minutes. Upon arrival the cabin crew told us don’t worry we know people have connecting flights and we will take care of you don’t worry! A joke! When I was able to finally get off plane I had two minutes to get to my gate, upon arrival they let some people through that were on my flight but not me. I had a first class ticket and the attendant at desk told me the previous airplane had issued and they had to downsize to a small airplane and 60people don’t have flights. When I saw a lady go through that was on my same flight I asked why is she able to go and he said I’m not sure, they then directed me to the a desk to rebook my ticket which is for a whole next day! No compassion or care they gave me my vouchers and that was it. Question to this airline why do you have connection flights if you know your not going to be able to fulfill the flyers to their connecting flights. I’m waiting for my luggage and I can’t wait to see what type of hotel they set me up in after reading these reviews.	0
Aegean lost my bag 7 days ago and it is impossible to contact them. The world tracer is not updated and while they are supposed to contact me after 5 days there is no contact. The bag is an expensive piece of sports equipment and I have no idea if I will see it again. I waited over 50 minutes on their central baggage phone number without answer. I emailed them numerous times and no reply.	0
Horrible. Flight delayed more than 1 hour. After luckily making my connection right on time, upon arriving I find that my checked-in luggage has been lost. I filed a complaint, they said my luggage would be delivered to me in 1 or 2 days. Two days have passed and I have not received any feedback. My address for delivery in their website is incorrect (I chose to send to my temporary address, but they are showing that they are sending to my permanent address, which is in another country). Their websites are broken so you cannot update any information successfully. I called multiple times, one call took more than 35 minutes and nothing was resolved. Other calls I have waited for 20 minutes and then the call was dropped without having the chance to talk to anyone.	0
I took off from Paris with a 20 hour layover in Dublin. The flight was delayed for over 2 hours. Upon arrival to Dublin Aer port I went to retrieve my baggage. Unfortunately it was lost. Before I checked this bag in in Paris I had told the check in lady that I do not want to check in my carry on. This was literally a small carry on that had no business being checked in. The lady said that the plane was full and that I should just check it in. This made absolutely no sense to me once I reached the inside of the aircraft which had an insurmountable amount of space for my carry on. Unfortunately I ended up checking in the baggage and once I reached Dublin my baggage was lost by the airline. Now I have no information on the status of my package. Only thing I can do is wait on them to find it and ship it to me. I had very important work related things in that luggage.	0
San Francisco to Paris via Dublin. Do NOT use this airline. It was our first time using them and it will definitely be our last. Both flights to our destination were late, putting us behind by about 2 hours on our arrival to Paris. A little annoying, but fine. However, the trip home was absolutely wretched lol and I cannot emphasize this enough. To start, when we arrived to check in (2 hours before boarding) there was already an announcement stating the flight was delayed by 1 hr. Once boarded we sat for an additional HOUR on the tarmac, causing us to miss our connecting flight home (amazingly the only flight of theirs that left only 15 minutes late). They re-routed us to Seattle, which meant an addition 2.5 hour layover before boarding the connecting flight. There was no offer of food or beverages even though we were missing our in-flight meal service. Once we boarded the connecting flight we AGAIN sat for 1 hour and 45 minutes in the tarmac. No offer of snacks or food. Mind you we are about 4 hours past when we should of had out meal service so we were starving. Thank god our last flight from Seattle to San Fran was with Alaska Airlines as they were great. So to sum things up, we were originally to be home at 3:30 pm on 9/2 but we didn’t arrive until 9/3 at 12 am and of course our baggage was still in Dublin, adding an additional 30 minutes in the airport to submit a claim for the lost bags. It was a nightmare and I will never ever use them again.	0
Disaster! Booked end March to fly from Stockholm to Geneva via Dusseldorf with my wife and 3 children, taking around 4 hours and thought I had a bargain. 6 weeks before departure was informed of a small change - had to leave 4 hours earlier to fly Stockholm - Berlin - Dusseldorf - Geneva, ie total journey time of 8 hours with children of 4, 6 and 8 years old. Immediately contacted Air Berlin who confirmed I could cancel if wanted (but by then flight prices had doubled) or else I would receive some confirmation if I contacted them via their website. Did this immediately and still haven't heard. Tried contacting them at the airport en route, but impossible to find an Air Berlin employee at the airport, only representatives from other companies who were shocked and sorry but weren't "able to do anything". Clear case of profit over customer but if you don't take care of the customer, then somebody else will and next time we will definitely not be flying with Air Berlin.	0
New York to Rome via Dusseldorf. We understand travel issues but AirBerlin was most disturbing and we still have not gotten through to any representative over 30 days later. Air Berlin has no customer service line for current customers only a "ticket booking line". And the representatives there will quickly and rudely tell you they cannot help you at all. This company has made itself inaccessible to its customers. We could only get bits of information through their affliate airline Alitalia. Basically though Alitaila said that it was AirBerlin we needed to get to to find baggage that had been lost with no trace for 4+days but then their is no way to reach Air Berlin - just email- to date we have and continue to send 40+ emails with no more than the automated reply that the message was received in return. There were multiple other details and issues (being told kmisinformation and waiting at airports only to find out the baggage was in fact still lost). But the biggest issue is Air Berlin's failure to respond to any messages or any emails-we have looked and tried multiple emails with no response.	0
Delhi to Zagreb via Moscow. The flights themselves are comfortable but I had a hellish experience trying to board a return flight to Delhi. Despite having all relevant travel documents, I was denied entry by=staff. They panicked because I have renewed my passport after my Indian visa has been issued. These are routine situations that should have been easily handled, but they did not let me on the plane. I have tried to reach out to local customer service for support, and they were just as dismissive initially, it took me several phone calls until I finally managed to get them to listen long enough to understand that their airport staff simply have not bothered to look at proper pages in my old passport that carried visa extension stamps.	0
Moscow to Bangkok. Aeroflot passed my flight to other airline - Rossiya with a downgrade of the quality of servic. The multimedia system didn't work, there was no any comfort packet like pillow, slippers or something, the aircraft was 10 years older than stated on the booking. For notice the Rossiya flight tickets are about 30% cheaper than Aeroflot. There was no excuse or compensation it was like usual behavior of airline.	0
Sharjah to Baku. Absolutely horrible service. First and the last time I will travel with Air Arabia. They sell you food and its acceptable, but when your kids are freezing and they sell you blankets, you know that they are just there to rip you off. They sell you a blanket for 69AED thats actually worth 20AED in the market. Extremely disappointing.	0
I was flying from Colombo to Bahrain via Sharjah with my 8 weeks pregnant wife. Firstly, the flight from Colombo to Sharjah was delayed for about 4 hours which led in missing the connecting flight to Bahrain. Any normal airline would at least provide passenger with correct information. At Sharjah airport (which is another part of terrible story), none of the staff had clear information. The pathetic level of customer care was seen particularly by "Help Desk". I was even given an answer by staff on the desk upon asking when is the next flight "any when!!". There was nobody present at the desk to reserve us a Hotel even. After going around like headless chickens, I found out that the flight would be in the same evening at 5:50pm. I was told that no need to get new boarding pass you will fly on the same boarding pass. At around 5pm, after sitting on chairs at Sharjah airport in miserable and uncomfortable environment, I was given another news. That the flight is actually full and we will be given 2nd priority if the passengers from connecting flight miss this connection. I even noticed that there were passengers who bought this flight on same day, were told by the staff to just "wait and we will call you" meaning they were not let to stand in the queue for boarding. This clearly shows the mentality of the airlines where they have made their money and let the poor people be as stand by. After me literally begging the boarding assistant and explaining him my wife situation, he let us go on the plane and luckily, our luggage was also gone through to be on the plane. I appreciate the help of the guys, but this should not have happened in the first place. It was not my fault that the flight was delayed from Colombo. Even the pilot admitted that it was out of their hands. At least offer us a free meal for goodness sake! The general views of public about airline and Sharjah Airport were quite obviously true. Also, the aircraft is not up to the scratch with other competing airlines in region like Gulf, Oman, Saudia etc. There is clearly a hopeless attitude prevailing throughout this airline management. My first and last ever experience of Air Arabia! I hope I get a refund because I am happy to prove each and every incident that happened in this episode.	0
Tehran to Sharjah. The flight was supposed to leave Tehran at 2:30pm but left at 11:00pm. a different conflicting reasons were given (in Arabic only) including technical problems...etc. Only until we got on the plane did the pilot told us that the fog in Sharjah was the problem. Instead of landing in Sharjah, we landed in Al-Fujairah, 80km away in the UAE. We were not allowed to leave the plane for couple of hours until they released us to the transit lounge which was holding the passengers of another 7 planes.  We were not allowed to leave the airport under different excuses. However, UAE nationals were permitted! We had to remain in the transit (literally a barn) for more than 8 hours. Throughout the entire ordeal, there was not a single Air Arabia agent that we could talk to. Bottom line, instead of arriving at 5:30pm, we arrived around 1pm the following day. The airline is very cheap and they will cut cost at the cost of anything happening to the customers. To add insult to injury, after all this ordeal, they would charge you to eat or drink on the plane. Please make sure you don't every give them your business. Pay extra to have a peace of mind and not ruin either you family reunion or your business trip. Interestingly, I learned later that the experience I had was not unique and what happened to us happened earlier and possibly part of a pattern to cut cost (avoiding hotel accommodations or landing at Dubai airport which cost higher landing fees.) The attached photo shows the passengers streaming onto the tarmac and not being allowed to go anywhere. What a miserable experience.	0
They delayed our flight and we lost our connecting flight, we had to stay in Mexico City and this is the place Aeromexico sends their “guests”- Wonderful VIP treatment as you can see below. I’ve got only one good thing to say about this hell hole. The staff are lovely and very friendly The hotel resembles more a 2 star prison than a hotel.  Extremely frustrating and disappointing is not enough to describe the whole experience. Traveller beware photos attached for reference. At this point I’m just hoping we won’t wake up with bed bug bites. How on earth is this considered a 4 star hotel is beyond me. What a joke! Will let the pics speak for themselves Enjoy! Showcasing the welcoming elevators. Bathtub/ shower combo pealing away and featuring stains from past guests. Another nice feature the tub didn’t drain the water, therefore with two of us in a room I got to enjoy a tepid dirty shower. Stains on the rugs everywhere and beautiful finishing touches. Sanitation protocols in place as we find hairs in the beds and bathroom sink, delightful touches.  Next morning they delayed the flight again now leaving Mexico City going to Canada because they had no flight crew. Been waiting for hours with 100’s of people in an overly crowded room because there are 3 delayed flights all with no crew and still no hope in sight of getting home. Had to sit on the floor because there is no room for some many people with delayed flights. Once we had boarded the flight, they said the plane was over capacity so they had to take 6 people off, threatening that otherwise the whole flight would be canceled. Finally after much convincing 6 people got off. It took another hour or so to sort out whatever situation that created, as they had to sort and find the luggage and get it off the plane.  Needless to say they have lost our business and	0
They don't have any type of consideration and respect. I have my cousin that they wont let her board to the gate. Not even do her check in just because she was 2 hrs before the flight. They wanted her to be there 3 hrs before. I can't understand what's the difference between 2 hrs and 3hrs before the departure.  When she was talking to them they simply ignored her.	0
Terrible airline. The staff review documents multiple times and give imprecise instructions to passengers. No call to announce departure and seems like purposely want passengers to miss the flights. Worse experience with an airline.	0
Pretty much no customer service at the airport or online. They left my luggage in Mexico City. At the airport staff were rude and not willing to help. I've submitted a claim but after 12hrs there's still no response or updates. Because my MX to La Paz flight is not showing up in the system I need to reach a customer service representative to edit my claim but it's impossible to reach anyone. They promised at the airport they would update it but they didn't. Oh and my TV screen didn't work on both flights!	0
We booked our flights for December 2021. As covid hit harder, we decided to plan for another month, so we changed our flights for May 2022. Due personal reasons, we can't fly to Greece. I contacted the customer service several times, waiting in the line over 15 minutes, 15 minutes which I need to pay, the second call they told me they cannot help as I booked the flight somewhere else. So I contacted the initial website and got the information, they do not have the booking, as I changed the date on the airline website. Long story short, we lost 400€. I would really recommend to book at bigger airlines, at least you will get help if needed. So disappointing!	0
I just wanted to share my terrible experience (and it is the same for a lot of people!) with Aegean Airlines! In my case, after booking a flight to Athens, they first cancelled my flight and, instead of reimbursing the ticket, they offered me a voucher. I've reluctantly accepted, considering that my girlfriend and I go very often to Greece because we love it and we have dear friends there. The voucher, due to the Covid emergency still not allowing us to use it, expired. When I asked a reimbursement, as per point 9 of their Terms & Conditions policy, they have deliberately ignored all the emails I have sent. They have lost 2 very good clients, considering that we had always flown with Aegean and that we keep going to Greece as often as we can. Now I will rather swim to Greece, than using Aegean again! Worst airline ever!	0
Couple hours after purchase through Expedia I realized I had the date one day earlier than what I planned. Called to find a solution. Originally I did not want to cancel the flight, only needed to change it. Aegean policies have no flexibility for the regular changes which would happen. It does not seem Aegean shows any interest in offering a useful service to customers but only have the customer stuck with a charge which they receive no services for because flexibility is not part of business. Aegean's website claims to have 24/7 customer service - I have been on the phone waiting for a rep for about 30 minutes and no answer to the extended that phone was automatically disconnected.	0
When we checked in at Chicago they charged me 100 dollars for a carry on they claim was too big. My daughter had the same carry on, but a solid green. On the return flight out luggage made it to Dublin, but hers did not make it onto the flight to Chicago. It has been over 72 hours and they are still unable to locate her luggage. Aer Lingus has not been helpful in trying to locate her luggage.	0
The plane and airline itself is very average. Decent quality television, meals were alright, however. The part that makes me give this airline below a 1 star is the fact they managed to lose 3 out of 4 of our luggage. As a student, the 2 most important items I lost were my laptop and clothes. It's been 12 days since, and my family has only gotten luggage with mattress linens, nothing important. We filed a claim, and have been ignored completely. Even if we did get reimbursed, there's data on my laptop that simply cannot be retrieved without the hard drive and the data was critical to my work as a student. Today, I found out that there is an entire facebook group called "Aer Lingus Complaints Action Group" with hundreds of people sharing this same experience, noting that Aer Lingus will not do anything unless you file a DOT complaint. They will ignore you, leave you on hold for an hour just to hang up, if you do not file a DOT complaint.	0
Berlin to Copenhagen. Worst airline ever. They just lost me and my friend as customers! We booked (two fairly expansive tickets, 390€) 3 months ago and when we came to the check in we are told we are on stand by due to overbooking. We didn't get any information before hand. Not any texts or emails. We were randomly picked and we were not the last ones to check in, we were actually early. I don't know why they chose us because the man behind the desk didn't answer any of our questions and he was rude and just wanted to get rid of us. So now we're sittning here at Tegel Airport and we have to wait 5 hours until the next flight leaves. Great times.	0
Air Berlin is by far the worst airline I have ever flown on. They are always delayed, and for my flight from Berlin to Vienna they didn't even post it on the screens. I can't think of any positive over other airlines. They are not the cheapest and do not offer good quality. This airline fails on every aspect of being an airline. Will never fly with them again.	0
Flew Berlin to Munich. Delays and problems with handling luggage is not addressed here since this might be an issue of the airports. Nevertheless it is unbelievable what Air Berlin delivers to its customers. 1) The system delivers a seat which cannot be changed - if you are about 6'3" it's a real pleasure to have a middle seat. 2) Air Berlin might have economic problems but that does not mean they must give cheapen their "customer-relationship". I am German and so try to use German Airlines but AB is a shame.	0
London to Hong Kong via Moscow. My daughter flew with Aeroflot and due to horrendous queues at passport check and security, a connecting flight was missed in Moscow. She alerted staff at security check and was told to push to the front. Other passengers pushed her back shouting that they too were about to miss their flights. WIFI is almost impossible to use at Moscow, so without communications she was  very upset to have missed her flight. The staff at the airport were rude and unhelpful telling her it was her fault that she missed the connection, however with hundreds of other people all missing connecting flights it would appear not. She had to queue for another hour just to talk to customer service. With no other options, we had to book her another ticket at considerable expense and then told that her return flight was invalid, due to her missing the connecting flight. So yet another expense booking her flight home. One of the busiest times of the year, you can imagine how much money we have spent on these flights. Response from customer service took exactly 1 month. A long winded message to say, she checked in at Heathrow accepting the transit time and ticket conditions, so there is nothing they will do.	0
Barcelona to Ho Chi Minh City via Moscow. Our flight from Barcelona to Madrid left 30 minutes late, our layover was only 1 hour and 45 minutes so we were very worried.  After landing we have to wait about 25 minutes to get off the plane, we missed our connecting flight. Ground staff and others on a different BCN to Moscow flight confirmed that over 5 hours is the normal flight time so the information they provide you is incorrect. We wait in line to get our flight changed to the following evening at 8 pm. Now it will not be direct, we must connect in Hanoi. We are told to come back at 10 pm for information about a hotel. 10 pm: long line to get hotel vouchers for about 50 people. 10:30 pm: Everyone has their hotel vouchers. We all stand around for 30 minutes and leave to go to the hotel. But there is only one lady checking passports so this takes 45 minutes. 12:15 We are on the bus. This ride is about 5 minutes but it takes almost 1 hour because the bus stops at a gate for about half and hour and after we arrive at the hotel we are not allowed to get off. 1am we arrive at the hotel and after being escorted to a desk there is one person checking people in, very slowly. 2am we are in our room. The hotel is okay but we are not allowed to leave our room, meals are delivered. The next day, we board the flight and have never seen such chaos. People are all trying to fit bags that won't fit. Overhead bins are shut that were empty. After a two hour delay, we finally take off. We can barely make our connecting flight.	0
Ras al Khaimah to Peshawar with Air Arabia. Worst experience. First flight was delayed for 5 hours. My return flight was cancelled for no reason without any prior notice. Very poor customer service. Was my first time flying with Air Arabia and will be my last. Would not recommend.	0
I booked a flight from Bangkok to Frankfurt (with a later connection to Valencia) at 23:00 local time. This flight was departing almost 7 hours later, at 5:50 am. However, when I approached the counter I found out the flight was already delayed to 19:00 pm. 13 hours delay! Ridiculous. And they let me buy the ticket from their own webpage. Most of the passengers accepted hotel and waiting, but ten of us couldn't wait. I explained to them about my connecting flight to Valencia and I accepted any possible route which would take me to Frankfurt on time or any part of Spain but they denied this option for four hours, insisting on my delayed flight with them as my only option (13h waiting in Bangkok airport plus 14h in Astana). Missing my connection to Valencia and being late for work. I even got the chance to talk to someone from management on the phone, but she would only say "I'm sorry". Only good part was their ground staff, which suffered this situation exemplary even though they were lacking the power to do something. Finally I accepted the refund of my ticket, which they signed, and booked a flight with another airline, spending a big amount of money to get to Madrid. After this, I was expecting the refund of the ticket, but they only offer me 3.930THB, which is not even a 1/4 of the amount I paid for the ticket. I have never in my life dealt with a despicable airline such as Air Astana. It makes me feel sad because they have really good staff onboard but, recommended? Of course not. They will ruin your holidays and feel ok about it.	0
Some friends and I were flying from Zurich to San José del Cabo. We booked Economy Comfort seats using the Aeromexico homepage. First disappointment: At the airport they said something didn't work, they cannot seat us at the booked economy comfort seats and we got very bad middle seats. At least it was said the charge for the seats gets refunded since it's clearly seen what was booked and where we are seated. Several other people had the same issue (in fact everyone who booked a seat upgrade online - the queue at the service desk was therefore quite long). Second and even worse disappointment: I got in contact with Aeromexico for the refund, a month later I got the answer that there will be no refund and they are sorry for the inconvenience. This is just fraud, they double booked and got paid for the economy comfort seats (in advance online and then again on site) and refuse to refund a performance not rendered. Never again.	0
Aeromexico left my bags in Mexico City after checking them in. Arrived at LAX with missing luggage and no help from the lazy workers standing around. Nobody knows the correct information, Nobody wanted to help except Cynthia at the Delta Luggage assistance desk. Although I paid for my luggage, paid to get back into the US once we stopped to connect to another flight in Mexico City. I arrive home in Los Angeles with no luggage and little help. I called customer service and the representative informed me to send an email to	0
This is my 5th flight I've taken with Aeromexico. (All within the same itinerary). Currently, waiting for my 6th flight and I don't have high hopes. I had to take 3 one way tickets to fulfill a wedding schedule. LAX to MEX to GTO GTO to MEX to Cancun Cancun to MEX to LAX This airline was not on time once. 5 flights ALL delayed. And I'm sure the 6th will be as well. Apparently the only flight to leave on time was my connection back to LA from Mexico City. 2.5hr delay LAX to MXC 1.5hr delay MXC to GTO 3hrs delay GTO to MXC 2hr delay GTO to Cancun (resulted in a missing my first day at the resort) 1hr delay Cancun to MXC (resulted in a missed connection) My first 2 flights were First Class, the 3rd Economy. The staff is friendly enough, but the food is atrocious. In Cancun, once I finally arrived after being delayed leaving GTO and MEX, my suitcase did not come out until near the end of the baggage, even though it should have been priority as I was First Class. I am assuming it's because the priority tag was ripped but I feel that the Ground Staff should know what their Priority tags looks like. All and all, I will never fly this airline again. This was the most miserable travel experience I have ever experienced.	0
Decided to join their loyalty status, I flew with them for over 2 years, then the pandemic came. Since COVID was with us for a couple of years I couldn't fly for obvious reasons. I had the joy of getting married a couple of weeks ago only to realize that my plans to use the miles I accumulated to go on my honeymoon weren't there anymore. Hopefully won't be flying with them anymore.	0
I bought tickets for flights and hotel however, when I needed to cancel in good time the airline refused to refund me. The level of English was broken at best and there was no attempt on the part of the airline to understand and rectify the issue. The complaints process was long and difficult to use. I tried to use the discount voucher codes for Covid-19 tests that the Aegean website was offering however, there were issues with using the codes so there was no way of using discount. In an attempt to escalate the issue I used the service Resolver, which is normally used as a last resort but this wasn't helpful as the airline simply did not engage in any way.	0
I booked a ComfortFlex ticket for a midday flight from Athens to Thessaloniki on April 3rd. We had a change in our plans and I had to change my ticket to an evening flight. This particular fare allows changes for the same day with no fee and seats were available on the new flight so I logged into my reservation and changed the flight successfully.  I then tried to reserve a window seat on the new flight but noticed that only middle seats were available for free. This seemed strange since the flight was not sold out and ComfortFlex tickets allow free seating in the entire aircraft except for the exit row seats, where a charge applies. I then noticed that the only window or aisle seats available on my new flight were those at the exit row and those would involve an extra 9 Euro charge. As I'm about to proceed with the payment of this 9 Euro charge, my boyfriend informs me he will be joining me on the same flight. We book a new ticket for him and when we reach the seat map on his reservation, we can see plenty window and aisle seats available for free. We decide to call the Aegean call center to inquire why our reservations show different seats maps even though we've both purchased ComfortFlex tickets and we're traveling on the same flight. Their response was that it must be a systemic error and if we wanted, we could wait until going to the airport and request a window or an aisle seat there. If anyone of you has ever called Aegean for similar matters, you'll know that 9 out of 10 times, it's always the "system". It's evident that they're manipulating the availability of their seat maps to force you to pay extra fees even when you've purchased their highest economy class fare.  We paid the 9 Euro fee this time but from our main choice, they will become our last choice until they get their act together. And of course it came as no surprise to read so many other reviews here from other passengers complaining about similar situations. I'm attaching a picture of the two seat maps and I leave you to draw your own conclusions. The bookable seats are those in blue and in my seatmap, window and aisle seats are not available.	0
My experience with Aer Lingus has been disgraceful and I would not recommend flying with them. I travelled from Auckland to Belfast to see family with Emirates and my last leg (London to Belfast) was with Aer Lingus. They lost all my check-in luggage for the duration of the trip and I spent much of my two week trip home in call waiting queues, which I was regularly on for over an hour and half at a time, only to be cut off and rushing around buying clothes and other essentials. I have sent emails, filled in their website forms and on my second to last day managed to get through to a person at lost baggage services. I told them so send my bags back to Auckland as I would be leaving the address that they had on file for me in Belfast, so wouldn't be there. They delivered the bags to the address I had already left and managed to ruin that day too. Its been 7 weeks now, I have sent many emails, tried calling loads of times even tried their online chat services and they don't respond - nothing, you are just sent in circles all the while they are taking other peoples money and running a shambles of an airline. I of course understand that bags do get lost from time to time, but the utter contempt you must have for your customers to not even respond to calls or emails for nearly 2 months is totally disgraceful. This company not only ruined a 2 week trip to the other side of the world but they have cost me a small fortune in international call (on hold from NZ for an hour a time) and in purchases replacing items that they lost. The level of incompetence and lack of any care for their customers is breathtaking. I will never fly with these people again.	0
Absolutely disastrous. Not expecting much from Economy, but a modicum of service would have been appreciated. Original outbound flight delayed by ~2 hours with no explanation. Lateness required an additional leg (DUB to London, then on to final destination)--arrived many hours late. After paying ~$1000 per ticket RT, I would have thought that a bottle/glass of water might be complimentary, but it costs 2 Euros for intra-Europe legs. I noticed that seating for 3 families (not ours though) was messed up (e.g., mother and 2 kids of ~2 years were assigned separate seats). International flights priced as premium airlines but services are low-cost airline quality. The savings of up to 20% for any Aer Lingus flight is not worth the savings. You have been warned.	0
Absolute worst airline I have ever used. I am a member to the Global Entry Trusted Traveler Program and stunned that Aer Lingus does not participate.  To find out why I did not have TSA precheck on my boarding pass I had to wait in the Aer Lingus line for almost 2 hours and then another 90 minutes in the TSA line. Once onboard I never received the special meal I ordered. I was also denied a refill of water. I got off the flight dehydrated and feeling dizzy and weak. The Aer Lingus app is also completely worthless. Would never recommend this airline to anyone. Amazed that Alaska Airlines recognizes such a cut rate, customer unfriendly airline as part of its frequent flyer program.	0
Berlin Tegel to Prague. Never ever will I fly with Air Berlin again, everything seemed nice and smooth from the check in to checking in our baggage but once we landed and we went to collect our checked in baggage we where hit with a shock! Half the flight was missing their baggage (mind you this aircraft had only 70 people on board) ground crew in the Prague told us they always do this and were not surprised. They believe that the bags were still in Berlin and sometimes take weeks to arrive. Now I understand these things happen so I left it and waited no one ever gets in touch with you, I tried emailing ofcourse there was no response. Tried calling the numbers on the website of course they didn't exist. You are better off catching trains around Europe or find proper a airline because these guys are a joke!	0
Vienna to Krakow via Berlin Tegel. One week. 4 Air Berlin flights, 3 delayed and to close the story a lost luggage for 26 hours. You book Air Berlin, but you fly Alitalia, where they speak Italian in a route between Vienna and Berlin. Or worse you fly with Air One, which supposedly ceased operations in 2014. It's all very confusing. The phones lines both Air Berlin and Berlin Tegel airport are not available all day. Nobody is answering your emails and you don't receive information where or when your luggage will be delivered. Bad, bad, bad.	0
Copenhagen to Berlin. Terrible customer experience I have had delayed luggage before and realize it is a risk of flying. My partner and I both had our bags not show up on a direct flight from Copenhagen to Berlin (1 hour flight) and it took 3 and 4 days respectively to get our bags. The issue was not the delayed bags but the complete lack of proper communication which could have addressed our concerns and stress. On our flight, at least a dozen people had same issue. No representative present, no informative communication. Automated messages saying no updates were not effective. No number to reach a person. I called numerous times the number I located and emailed and no answer ever at number and email was simply automated with no information. When I finally received an update that my luggage had arrived in Berlin, I asked to confirm where to pick up to ensure they did not deliver to hotel I was leaving at, and never any reply over several hours. I showed up at Berlin baggage service centre on way out of city and they could not locate. I went to the air Berlin business class counter and the woman staffing refused to help and had zero empathy and was rude. I asked for her manager who had same lack of empathy. I asked to speak to her manager and he was finally the first person who tried to help and brought a luggage person who tried as well. But by this point I had lost my patience with air Berlin. They could not locate my luggage. Finally an hour before I left the city - four days after arriving - my luggage was located at the baggage service centre. I still have not received any apology for air Berlin nor any information on delayed flight compensation process and forms. After reading these reviews it is clear it is an airline issue much larger than my own experiences.  All air Berlin had to do was provide simply updates each day with facts: "your luggage has not left Berlin, we are trying to get it to you by ddmmyy." And I would have been fine however the lack of any human being reachable and the lack of empathy by their business class check in counter and her manager mean I will never fly them again.	0
New York to Bologna via Dusseldorf, July 3rd 2017. The departure time at JFK was 9:40pm (Flight No. 7481). I was at the check-in point with plenty of time (7:00pm.) The flight attendant told me "there is a 3-hour delay because a baby got sick on the plane and they had to land." She told me not to worry my connecting flight layover was 3.5 hours so I would have made it and they would have made up some time during the flight. At the gate I was told they had to change my connecting flight to Bologna to a later flight at 8:30pm instead of 2:55pm (a serious problem for me), but they told me that they only did that as a precaution in case I cannot make it to the original flight (at 2:55pm) which is what I had booked. The attendant at the gate told me that once in Dusseldorf I would have been able to take the Flight 8686 at 2:55pm. We boarded at 12:45am with more than 3 hours delay. We finally took off and on board I asked what I should do once in Dusseldorf. They said as soon as outside the aircraft look for the information point with Air Berlin attendants and they would have told me where to go to get to the original flight 8686. The flight attendant sent me to Gate B56 and warned me to "hurry" because the flight was departing in less than an hour. I ran to Gate B56 only to find no one there. I went to another attendant who told me that Flight AB 8686 was at Gate 44 two floors down. I ran again with a heavy backpack and a carry-on. I had to stop to catch my breath and I felt dizzy. Two police officers saw me and asked me if I was OK. I had to explain what happened to them because they were concern about my health. I finally made it to Gate B44. The Flight 8686 also departed with about 15 minutes delay. On board,  I had to pay for coffee €2.50 for a regular coffee.  At that point I only wanted to get to my final destination. We landed in Bologna BLQ about 10 minutes late. There I had the final humiliation: my baggage was missing. I went to Baggage claim and was told that probably my suitcase was moved to a later flight which will land at night around 10:30pm. I filed a complaint form there and they told me they should call me if the baggage arrives and I would have to go back to the airport to pick it up. It is now 9:30pm and on the Air Berlin website there still no information about my baggage. This has been a horrible experience. I will now have to go back to the airport to hopefully pick up my luggage tonight. I'm exhausted and outraged by Air Berlin.	0
Colombo to London via Moscow. Worst airline I've travelled. Delayed flight by 19 hours as missed connecting flight. No hotel. No representative from the airline. All we were left with was running around with the poorly trained Moscow airport staff who most were hiding from customers as they did not know what to do.	0
Miami to Athens via Moscow. The flight was delayed around 1 hour, we were making rounds for half an hour because of airport traffic. We landed 18.20 and the boarding for the transit flight was at 18.35. We got stuck in the security check. Only 2 lines for all these people. In these situations they should help us to pass faster. We arrived at the gate at 19.00 after running for 15 minutes between terminal d and f. The plane left with not notifying anyone. You should be ashamed doing this in such a day. It's new year's eve. They changed our tickets to Athens for tomorrow at 9. They gave us also a voucher of 1000 rub, (12 euros) for meal. Now we are waiting to a line of 30 people to ask about overnight accommodation. We have to wait for 14 hours until next flight. Thanks Aeroflot for spending new year's eve far from my family.	0
Amman to Kuwait. I had a very bad experience with Air Arabia. The flight was supposed to leave at 1pm and they informed us because of some technical issues the flight should be delayed until 5pm. and no from the company came back to inform the passengers about the status. On the boards we have seen its delayed to 6pm. Again no one appears we called the airport security team to bring us Air Arabia staff but no one shows up. Then they announced the flight will be delayed until 8pm for the 3rd time. Gate changed 3 or 4 times. Company was not clear and keeps ambiguity from the beginning. Although technical issues can happen any time, you have to be clear with your passengers.	0
Aeromexico is a terrible airline - buyer beware! Think twice before you book a flight, and make sure you read the fine print every time. I have traveled to hundreds of cities, and I have never experienced such a terrible level of service. I purchased a ticket, confirmed my flight and I was bumped from the flight at the last minute because they "didn't have enough seats". Of course, one would expect a refund having paid for a flight and being denied boarding, but even this was not confirmed at the gate and the airline said I need to reach out by phone. Here's the catch - Aeromexico has no customer support phone line! They only accept emails. This is incredibly frustrating and borderline manipulative. Do not fly AeroMexico!	0
My mother was in a bad accident and in ICU fighting for her life. We had a flight coming up and though we didn’t pay the premium airfare, we thought maybe with a medical emergency they would allow us to pay the cost and move our dates. I called customer service and was told no I didn’t get that type of ticket, but maybe send an email to customer service (makes no sense) and they would be able to help me. I send the email and get a confirmation number back saying they’ll be in touch in a couple of days. I waited 2 weeks. I tried to reach them via email and by Facebook messenger and all I would get is an automated response saying someone will be with me shortly. No one ever comes on. Finally, I got tired of waiting and left a bad review on their Facebook page. Surprise! I get a message asking if I needed help. They told me to send a document proving my case, which I did even though the hospital stated that’s a HIPPA violation to state her diagnosis like they asked. I get an email back saying sorry but you will just have to take the loss on your tickets. So on top of my mother in an induced coma for the last 4 weeks, I now lose almost $2000 in airfare. Shame on them for their lack of compassion in extreme situations. I was even offering more money to fill their greedy pockets and they still said now. I will never use them again and will always steer my friends away from them. They should be ashamed.	0
The worst airline ever. They charged me 50 dollars for local flight and 30 dollars for international one and then they lost me. The worst part was that there was no representative in baggage claim at 2:30 am and waited for 30 minutes to somebody call them. Food is mediocre. Wifi is only free for messaging and they don’t provide blanket. Definitely would not recommend it.	0
After being issued EMD vouchers for flights cancelled by Aeromexico in 2020, they refuse to extend the validity of our vouchers for 6 months to allow us to travel directly, safely and affordably. This is despite the fact that for the entire duration of the vouchers validity, AM were not running direct flights from the UK, the costs of all indirect flights now total four times more than the value of our vouchers. This renders the EMD vouchers useless and Aeromexico have essentially stolen £884 from us. Hours and hours on the phone, told conflicting information by phone operative vs email operative. So sad and disappointing, we are UK tourists desperately wanting to experience Mexico but instead have felt completely frustrated and robbed. Do not book with Aeromexico, British Airways have flights for a fraction of the cost and are much more reliable and less corrupt.	0
Both me and my wife are frequent business travelers and Gold Miles & Bonus members. Aegean Airlines started off as a promising, refreshing presence in the Greek market but it is clear that they are in a steep decline. We've experienced such poor customer service in the last several years on a number of occasions. Refunds that took 18 months and countless calls and e-mails to process (for flights that Aegean Airlines canceled). Missed connections due to flight delays where they failed to assist us to reach our destination or arrange overnight accommodation for us. We were asked to cover the expenses on our own and then submit the receipts to receive compensation. We've taken trips where we were asked to pay service fees to change Comfort Flex and Business Class tickets. These two categories are their most unrestrictive fares and allow same day changes without a penalty, yet on a number of occasions, when their website failed to successfully change our tickets, we were asked to pay a service fee to proceed with the change. I could go on and on with a number of other disappointing practices but all in all, it seems that they've adopted policies and restrictions that we only find present with the so called low-cost carriers. All while charging full service carrier regular fares. Until they re-adjust their policies to a more customer service oriented level, we will certainly avoid flying with them in the future. Enough is enough.	0
The very worst travel experience of our lives. Flight from O'Hare was late to leave, which caused us to miss our also-Aer Lingus connection in Dublin. Flight staff was snippy and unpleasant. When a later-day flight to Amsterdam finally got us there, Aer Lingus had left our luggage in Dublin. This left us trapped at Amsterdam until the day's third flight brought our bag. All in all, what should have been an easy flight with a connection turned I to a 32 hour travel day, most of which spent waiting for Aer Lingus to either show up, find our bag, or otherwise demonstrate basic competence as an airline. Never again.	0
July 28th, 2022 - secured my seats with Aer Lingus to ensure my daughters (minors) were seated with a parent. Agent provided seat numbers and confirmation. August 10th 2022 - Checked app the day before flight to see no seat numbers. Jumped on a chat with Aer Lingus. They didn't have any information even after I provided the detail and confirmation. They just said go online at 9:25 to book the seats. That didn't confirm my kids were with me. They didn't care at all or take ownership for dropping the ball. Waited on the phone for over an hr to be hung up on by the agent. No one helped. No one cared. No one took ownership despite me being responsible weeks in advance. Still unsure if my kids will sit with me or my husband tomorrow.	0
The ticket is pricing low earlier and goes up significantly over time. It says free of charge to change the ticket but you have to pay the difference which is almost $1000 more when you change your flight on the last days. You end up to pay a higher price for low quality of flight.  The baggage was missing and you have to fill out form and pick them up a couple of days later. The return flight was a few hours late and ended up missing the second flight and waiting in the airport 5-6 hours more for the rescheduled flight.	0
I travel very frequently for business and pleasure to Europe and this is by far the worst airline service I experienced within the past 10-15 years. The aircraft servicing flight from Chicago to Berlin was very old, seats did not recline, majority of TV screens did not work, despite the crews effort to reboot the audio system. Normally, obstacles like this wouldn't impact me, but traveling with kids makes a big difference (try to explain to your child he won't be able to recline the seat or use TV on 9 hrs flight). Lastly, and most importantly, Air Berlin lost our luggage. There were about 30 + other passengers flying on the same flight who reported missing luggage. It is been a week and we did not hear back from the airline. We sent about 11 emails to different departments with copies of claim, lost baggage tags, etc. No response. Furthermore, none of the telephone numbers provided on the website are working numbers. I do not recommend this airline and certainly will not consider it for any future travel.	0
Air Berlin is by far the worst airline I have ever flown on. They are always delayed, and for my flight from Berlin to Stockholm they didn't even post it on the screens. I can't think of any positive over other airlines. They are not the cheapest and do not offer good quality. This airline fails on every aspect of being an airline. Will never fly with them again.	0
The transit in Moscow airport was chaotic. Massive non-organized queues of more than one hour the made at least 150+ people to miss their following flights. Another chaos at the Aeroflot counters where I had to elbow and push for two hours to get my boarding pass. Not enough staff for the amount of people stranded. The 3 poor girls behind the counter did what they could. Again, unorganized queues and lack of sensitiveness toward families, children, elderly people who could not struggle to be near the counter. We all had to spend the night in the terminal. Oh yeah, they lost my luggage which I got 5 days later after an unanswered email from the Aeroflot lost and found department.	0
Tel Aviv to Colombo via Moscow. My daughter was scheduled to take off at 13:15 but due to a delay of more than three hours on the flight, it missed the flight connection and stayed overnight in Moscow. The problem is that her case with the two surfboards did not reach Moscow and cannot be found. Because of the language limitations of the workers in the field she could not understand the fate of her baggage. One representative told her that the sails would go directly to Colombo. Of course, the two surfboards did not reach Sri Lanka. Then they were told that in Moscow and again after a long clarification they were not found in Moscow either. In another email, I was told that they were in Barcelona and wanted to know where to send them. Happy  I gave them the address of my home in Sri Lanka. Yesterday I received another email, claiming that despite the previous email, they were not even in Barcelona. We do not have a place where the surfboards, my daughter is a week on a surfing trip without surfboard.	0
Moscow Sheremetyevo to Magnotogorsk. I came to register in in the Airport Sheremetyevo SVO on time. There was huge queue of people before the registration desks, and only three were operate. Airport stuff  were delivering invalid persons to registrate them out of turn without stopping, and all queue did not move. There was a crowd of angry people which were late. All time the staff were leaving for a while to anywhere a lot of times to solve other issues instead of passengers registration. There were no guarding to remove the angry crowd which only disturb. After that I got to a registration desc, I heard only "I am sorry for the huge queue but you are late". Boarding to my flight was in progress, but they refused to take my luggage. And after that they delayed my flight even. I have a lot of time to get on the plane. There is no reasonable service on the registration and there is no reasonable service after this. Management of people is in zero level. There is no change a ticket to another day, there is no money refund. I wanted to buy new ticket, there was no a ticket to my town, but they did not even guess to offer ticket to another nearest town.	0
Flight G9301 at 14.25 11th October 2014 from Kiev to Sharjah was delayed for 20 hours due to technical problems with aircraft. All passengers were seated at the aircraft during 5 hours without any food at all! We got beverages twice only. During that passengers had to listen to captain's promises about departure every 20 minutes each hour. Before flight cancellation captain told the passengers that the aircraft was fixed and ready to fly but the crew were out of hours. After disembarkation baggage claim procedure was unorganized and horrible. We spent a night at the hotel and departed the next morning.	0
This was the worst airline experience I have ever had. On our flight from Chicago to Mexico City our bags were forcibly checked for being the “last to check in” even though we checked in via their app at 6am Thursday for a 12:30am Friday flight and then checked in again upon arrival at the airport at 7pm. This was the first flight to be delayed, the staff at the gate and flight attendants were beyond rude and unhelpful, and the plane ride itself was horrendous. Our flight home from Cancun to Mexico City was delayed for over an hour and we were not informed of this delay until we were supposed to be boarding, we still do not know why the plane was delayed. We had a connecting flight to make in Mexico City which we made them aware of and they promised 3 times that we would make it, Mexico City would hold the plane for us. We were told we would touch down in Mexico City at 6pm, instead we touched down at 6.37. Our connecting flight left at 6.50. We ran across the airport only to miss our connecting flight and play the game of how are we getting home. It was a struggle to find anyone in the airport in uniform who spoke enough English to understand us. Person after person just told us, we don’t speak English, sorry we can’t help you. We finally get someone to help us book a new flight that was 15 hours later. Aeromexico gave us vouchers for a hotel, transportation, and some food. Very generous, thank you. We get to the hotel they put us in to find out the hotel was booked up completely and we were going to have to wait 30 minutes to then be shuttled another 20 to a new hotel. By this time it was 12.30 in the morning and we had to be up again at 5 just to head back for our new flight. It was such a frustrating travel day. Our new flight starts boarding on time at 9am, we are so excited to be leaving and leaving on time until we sit on the plane fully boarded for 40 minutes before we even take off. Again, the flight was delayed. Out of 4 flights in total that we took on this one trip, 3 flights were delayed for at least 40 minutes. I do not recommend flying with Aeromexico and I especially do not recommend flying with them when you have a connecting flight. Your odds of making it are slim. The staff were unhelpful and rude and if at all possible I would rate my experience with them a 0/10. Never again will I be flying with Aeromexico.	0
Never Again. Aeromexico was a very bad experience in so many ways. Food is cookies and coke, chairs are so old, on-board Wifi connections with no Internet, Movies stop working every five minutes, passenger boarding from front to rear instead of rear to front, insufficient overhead storage, no gates in Mex City. Inability to arrive/depart on time, lack of accountability, Lying to customers and blaming air traffic control for company delays to avoid issuing hotel vouchers, cabin crew who disappear during the flights. I arrived 2 hours ahead of departure time and checked in with no problem. I was told that flight was on time and boarding would start 320PM for a 4:10 PM departure. The plane arrived at 3:40 in Merida. Shortly after they announced that, the flight would be delayed until 5pm due to air traffic control delays. A big lie of course. Around 430PM the gate paged me and told me that I should not get on the plane because most likely my connecting flight would depart before we arrived. The gate agent manager said tough luck and refused my accommodation request. I opted to board and take my chances.  When we arrived my flight was still on the ground. But the pilot parked 3 feet short of the spot he needed to be and a tow truck took 15 minutes to move the plane another 3 feet. First class disembarked using the staircase, but then the staircase broke and another 15 minutes were required to get another staircase. Pilots did not inform the passengers about the bad parking job nor the staircase. My name was removed from the passenger manifest to Miami without even informing me or asking consent. The new flight was the next day. With me off the passenger manifest, my original flight to Miami could take off without me. After I made a huge scene in the middle of the hundreds of people waiting at the Mexico city counter, I was awarded a hotel room and 4 hours of sleep. And of course as mentioned by others, another COVID test costing 750 pesos was required. Aeromexico is a total joke.	0
I bought a ticket for a flight from Ecuador to Russia with Aeromexico and Air France. The day after the purchase, I received a letter that one of the flights was changed, the new route was not suitable for me, because I do not have a visa to Europe and I was not able to fly on the new changed route. In this connection, an involuntary refund was issued, the money for which the airline does not want to return. Today is March 7th 2022 and support is just ignoring my refund messages.	0
We were scheduled to fly from Merida on 28Feb 2022, flight# AM 829 and connect to Delta flight# DL605 to Minneapolis. AM 829 was 2+ hours late causing us to miss our connection to DL605. We were told we would have to return to the main ticketing counter to find a solution to our problem. Going back out of the security area and waited to talk with an agent. When we finally spoke with an agent, we were told we would have to wait until the next day to get the same flight. Asked if we could take a different flight to anywhere in the USA, then to Minneapolis, was met with a resounding NO! How about a hotel voucher? NO! How about a voucher for a new COVID test because AeroMexico delayed our travel? NO! Several other passengers were in the same situation. One person did talk someone into a hotel voucher, but we were refused. Our decision was to get out of Merida right away and make it to Mexico City, so we did not have to deal with the endless no responses we were encountering from AeroMexico. AeroMexico did get us boarding request with Delta (not boarding passes) but offered us nothing for our extra lodging costs and inconvenience. They said Delta would determine if our COVID test were still valid. We were lucky to find seats on DL605. We had paid for Comfort+ but had to settle for Main 1. If I was Delta, I would cut my alliance with AeroMexico yesterday. Local flyers said this was typical for your punctuality.	0
My wife and I booked a trip on Expedia. The rate for economy class seemed acceptable although it restricted us to a single carry-on of no more than 8 kilos. At the airport duty free we bought some items and when tried to board we were told that we had to pay 60 extra euros for the duty free bag. When we tried to put the contents into our carry-on they told us that we would still have to pay the 60 euros since our bags would be above the 8 kilos allowed. In the end we had to pay or lose our flight.	0
Absolute shambles from start to finish. Dreadful experience at Manchester Airport. Staff were rude. Check in staff checked all of our bags under one travellers names, which has caused complications. One bag did not arrive at Orlando. Subsequently tried to get help from Aer Lingus, which is non existent. Case reported as missing but no updates provided. Call centre staff don't understand when you phone them. No one replies to e-mails. The plane itself was scruffy.	0
Frankfurt to Dublin. I lost my luggage, I travelled on July 6th 22. Till now I have not received it. Very bad experience with Aer Lingus. Nobody is there to support.	0
I received an email several hours before the flight saying the flight would be delayed an that if I had a connecting flight before a certain time, to call the airline for rescheduling. After 15 minutes on hold I was told to come to the airport and they would assess the situation at that time. Upon arrival at the airport, I was told that there was no way I could make my connecting flight. After considerable research, they told me the best way to get to my Paris that day would be to go to London and take the train to Paris, I would then submit the train and any related expenses for reimbursement, Well I submitted the expenses 7 weeks ago and have not had a formal response, I call customer service repeatedly, usually with 30 minute hold times, and am consistently told to wait as there are a long line of claims ahead of me. I am never given any way to escalate the issue or any idea of when the case will actually be heard. I opened a case with small claims court this week. The issue of the missed connection is understandable. I perhaps should have avoided that, or at least picked one with more room for error. But the problems with customer service, both at the airport and in the claims handling, are unforgiveable. Aer Lingus used to be a premier airline back in the day. Now they are a poorly run budget airline. Avoid at all costs!	0
I flew with Aer Lingus with 2 different flights. Both flights were an hour delayed, but that happens. However my baggage was lost on 6/12 going from LHR to DUB (it is now 7/28) and I have still not received it nor heard back from a single employee even though I’ve left many messages. Not only was my luggage lost but I was treated very poorly by the baggage claim staff at the DUB airport. I asked questions on the process of getting my bag back and the employee responded “this is what’s wrong and annoying with Americans, they always want to control things and are always so mad about their missing luggage” Obviously anyone who’s luggage goes missing wants it back? Basically this man brought me to tears and couldn’t care less about how rude he was being and denied my request to personally pick up my luggage, where if he let me, I'd have my luggage by now. It’s been 6.5 weeks.	0
Aer Lingus cancelled my original flight on Sunday, which included a layover of 1.75 hours at Dublin from London. They booked us on a replacement flight for 16.40 on July 26. They clearly rented a budget airline’s plane. It’s extremely sub standard compared to the ones normally used for this flight. Obviously need to catch up from stranding customers from Sunday so they’re piling everyone on top of each other. The usual configuration for this flight has 31 inches of legroom. In these seats my 5’9” slim frame barely fits. I did not pay $1,100 per seat (7 of us) for this. Boarding process was another piece of utter chaos. Almost no announcements to tell us they couldn’t work out how to open a couple of doors. I was expecting flight entertainment in the seat back but there isn’t any. No Wi-Fi either.	0
This was my first time flying with Air Berlin on a trip from Chicago to Salzburg and a return flight from Prague to Chicago. It was the worst airline experience I have had in about 20 years of frequent flying. Here are some key reasons: Customer Service is non-existent. No one ever answers their phone number and their online service always returns an error message. I tried for two weeks both online and on telephone with one simple request, to upgrade my seat on my return flight (in other words, pay them more money!). One night, with Expedia on the line with me, we waited on hold for 95 minutes and I finally fell asleep at 1am. Also, with one exception on return flight, every single Air Berlin person I dealt with was not only extremely poor at customer service, but even rude. One flight attendant was just mean to the person in front of me who asked if they could give them their trash. Another flight attendant was rude when I asked a simple question at the counter. Another in baggage claim area in Berlin was rude. Their seats in economy are smaller than any other airline seat I have experienced. I had an eight hour flight with the seat back in front of me literally 10 inches from my face. I am 5 feet 5 inches and my knees hit the seat in front of me the whole time. Be aware they will charge you $60-100 extra just to pick a seat - any seat, including economy - in advance of your flight. The WIFI does not work. I paid for WiFi going over and back and was never able to get on it. The flight attendants were no help whatsoever and were again rude when I inquired The worst part was that I experienced two delayed flights - one from Berlin to Salzburg and one from Berlin to Chicago. Both were handled terribly. When I arrived late in Chicago to make my connection to MSP, I literally ran to the gate and got there in time to get on the flight, but Air Berlin without my consent or knowledge had changed my flight to a flight 4 hours later instead and American Airlines would not let me get on my original flight. When I called Air Berlin to complain about this while sitting in ORD for 4 hours, I again waited on hold for 2 hours and finally decided they did not deserve any more of my time or effort in giving them feedback. They probably won't even read this or care, but I wanted to alert other travelers - avoid this airline!	0
I fly a lot, actually I'm one of those who commute every week. I find its hard to say I will never fly this airline again as: 1) I have to be flexible with the availability and 2) it would probably delete all options as there will most likely be unfortunate circumstances one time or another. Air Berlin is in a league of its own. The flights are usually delayed out of Budapest and not that its great, but its doable. But what I don't get is the incredible lack of communication. No one informs the 20 some passengers that the connecting flight will be there waiting. They don't at all care about the stress the passengers are in. Side note: If you are unlucky to be parked in another terminal (20 minutes left to your departure), they will not take any effort whatsoever in informing you where to go or even update the screens signalling delays. Then you're hit with a one lane open security control, again they don't care if the flight you're about to take is leaving in 5 minutes its slow. Yesterdays flight, once we got in the bus, the driver hacked this thing causing most of us to almost fall over and then once out of the bus, they refused to open the doors cause there was another group let in from another plane in the connecting terminal. Now we were running extremely late and running to the gate. All gates had the destinations show on the screen as is usually the case, except for the one going to Stockholm, so we ran up and asked and were brushed off. They tell us to go outside and what do we find? A bus parked right by the gate a plane right in front of us and one far to the right and again, nothing is marked. I mean, when you fly Ryanair or Wizz Air or any of these cheepy ones, its all marked. Why is this so difficult to figure out? Well obviously it is not, it is due to the lack of care. They think their passengers are a painful must. No communication whatsoever. All this anxiety and stress for the passengers, especially when you're taking the last flight out is unnecessary. Last time I flew them, my luggage got stuck in Berlin for 4 days. I have one more ticket in my pre-purchased pile and then that's it. Never again. All the issues with Air Berlin could be mitigated with care and communication. But I guess they have so many they don't have to worry about it.	0
Orlando to Munich via Düsseldorf. The worst airline ever. Going back to Orlando, they first delayed by an hour, then an additional half hour, before I knew what was happening, 4 hours later and still at the gate. The staff was unprofessional, they seemed annoyed at customers asking them about the delays.	0
Phuket to Dublin via Moscow. We landed in Moscow at 8pm missing our connecting flight which was taking off at 7.40pm. When we got off the aircraft and were directed to an information desk, which was crowded with people. It was a two hour wait before we got speaking to someone at this desk to be advised that we had to go to another information desk as they couldn't solve our issue. Eventually after 6 hours we were issued with our new flight details and told we would be given accommodation as the next flight out was 7.40pm the following evening. We had to wait a further hour for a bus to cobring us to hotel Novotel.  Arriving at the hotel we were escorted by security and had to wait another hour to be given key cards and directed to our rooms. As a smoker we came back out of our rooms to see where we could go and advised by security that we were not allowed leave, checking the main hall door finding it was locked and then to be advised to smoke in the bathroom of our rooms with no smoking signs everywhere! Fire safety practices reduced to zero at this hotel! Next morning we were escorted to a hall down stairs for breakfast and later, lunch. Breakfast was a slice of ham and cheese with stale bread, lunch was cold. The treatment we received was awful and disrespectful. Eventually arriving at our final destination to be advised one part of our luggage was still in Moscow.	0
Their customer service is worst. They seem very helpful but each one gives a different solution. I canceled my trip in December 2021 and was issues an open ticket. Since then have been calling them to get a new reservation some agents says they can help some say that there is an issue with the reservation and only customer support (AMCS) can help. Its been 15 days and this AMCS and responded to my email. I lost my hotel booking and had to pay penalty. I called the number again hoping someone can assist. Was on a call for 2.5 hours (1.5 hours was on hold) and she said she can exchange my ticket but will need to call me in an hour. She didn't call but generated a new pending reservation with difference of $3500 while she said the difference will be not more than $200. I called the number again today (the next day), after 1 hour of explaining the entire issue she says only AMCS can help but I need to pay for exchange and she can do it. Finally I agreed for new dates for exchange, she hung up the call. This is so frustrating. My $5400 is stuck with Aeromexico and I have lost around $500 dollars on hotel booking cancelation due to their pathetic customer support. their agents itself have no way of contacting the AMCS which seems like a high authority of customer support who can only take decisions about upgrades or refund. Such a frustrating and disappointing experience.	0
After having to cancel our trip due to Covid, we are finally going this year. Because I had a voucher from AerLingus I had to call to arrange my flight. It was a nightmare. It took at least 4 phone calls (Avg wait time was 60 min) to finally get it scheduled. On one memorable phone call, after waiting an hour to speak to someone, the Rep hung up on me. Now that the day has arrived, when I try to check-in online (because they didn’t give me a seat assignment), the website said I can’t check in until 7/28 - which is two days after my flight leaves. During an online chat with Support (another 45 min wait), the rep said “that’s when you can check in, sorry for the inconvenience” and the disconnected from the chat. Trust me, this airline is not worth the frustration, pay a little more if you have to, choose another airline	0
Probably the worst airline in Europe. JFK to Dublin was uneventful, the food was lackluster but edible, and the IFE worked well. Dublin to Vienna and back was no frills. Dublin to JFK was a nightmare: The flight was 2.5 hours late. The food was disgusting, no free alcohol on board, not even beer/wine. Only 1 six-ounce soda per passenger, no refills, not even water. No TVs on a 7 hour transatlantic flight. The seats were tiny (9 abreast instead of the usual 8), and rock hard. And the broke a wheel off my luggage. I will never fly EI again.	0
Berlin to Frankfurt. I have used Air Berlin for the first time and the last time. They overbooked the 8.50am flight, AB6577, flying from Berlin to Frankfurt by 10 seats. They bumped us and told us they could not book us another flight the same day. They offered us a 2nd class train ticket and told us to take a bus to the train station. They did not offer to pay for a hotel if we flew out the next day. Overall the personnel were matter of fact. "This is our company policy. Take it or leave it. But don't make me repeat it." I don't know how airlines can get away with selling seats multiple times. It's not worth it to fly Air Berlin to save a couple of Euros. Next time we choose an airline that knows what quality service is.	0
Paris to Krakow via Berlin. On May 19 my partner and myself were supposed to flight Air Berlin from Paris to Krakow via Berlin with a first flight leaving Paris at 3pm and an arrival in Krakow scheduled at 6.40 pm. The initial flight has been delayed by nearly 2 hours and we missed the connection. Nothing has been arranged to put us on another of the Air Berlin flights to Krakow on the evening the same day or early morning the next day. When we arrived at Berlin around 6pm we had to queue for 2 hours and 45 mns at the Company desk, where finally at 9.30 pm we were placed on a flight to Stuttgart at 8.20 am the next day with a connecting flight there. We arrived at 6.20 am at the Airport on the 20, to discover that our flight to Stuttgart had been cancelled! There was an earlier flight to Stuttgart but they refused to take us while they had vacant seats! We had then again to queue two hours at Air Berlin desk and finally got bookings for flights to Krakow via Munich leaving Berlin at 7 pm. We arrived in Krakow at 11.05 pm the 20th May, thus 32 hours after the scheduled departure from Paris. And to add insult to injury, it is impossible to get from the Company reimbursement of the expenses I had to bear during this unexpected stop of 24h in Berlin! This company is a shame!	0
New York to Tel Aviv via Moscow. The ground staff were very rude. I had 1 suitcase to check and a carry on plus  backpack. I arrived 2 hours before the flight and they try to charge me for overweight baggage. They even check the carry on weight so when I tried to balance it with the carry on or put the coat on me they yelled on me we close the check in.  Even I had enough time so I checked the carry on for 100$.	0
Guangzhou to Hamburg via Moscow. Flight from Guangzhou to Moscow was already delayed. When we arrived in Moscow it was a huge mess. We had to wait for five hours before they let us go to the hotel. Some passengers got food vouchers, some didn't. Even the information they did not provide properly. Basic things like what's next or where to meet, all not clearly explained. The information given was very limited. Staff attitude extremely bad and arrogant. It's already awful enough if you involuntarily have to spend a night extra because your flight is delayed. As for the hotel accommodation. It started with the check-in where  tired passengers had to wait in the bus, while tiny batches of people were allowed to check in. Once we got off the bus we had, additionally to our already four hour wait at the airport, wait again for half an hour to get our room cards. Three hours before check-in I already knew that I'd be staying in Novotel, how come they were not prepared and just handed over the keys. What terrible logistics!! In the morning after shower I found there was no body lotion and toothbrush. In the bathroom it said: if you need anything just call 75. Which I did, only to receive a rude reminder that I'm not a 'real' guest and should get the items at the reception myself. Once I went to this reception, the chap didn't even understand what I wanted. So together we called 75 and now they delivered. To add insult to injury, the breakfast was worse than in any basic youth hostel. Only dry bread, jam and butter. And constantly watched by security. I was extremely disappointed. Based on this experience I'll never choose this terrible airline again.	0
My wife my daughter (infant) and son travelled to Goa by Air Arabia - Dammam-Sharjah-Goa. Air Arabia did not provide the Bassinet for my infant even though it was mentioned in the E-ticket. My wife requested the crew to provide the Bassinet but they did not help her to provide this.	0
I have had a horrible experience with this airline. If you don't have any issues, consider yourself lucky. Most of the staff isn't polite and will refuse to help even when the airline is at fault. My flight got changed 3 times. Now, I have a 22-hour layover. I'm not even able to buy extra luggage because the app won't allow it, and their "customer service" line will not help. First, you will need to call dozens of times and wait for hours on the phone before getting someone to pick up. Then, if you are lucky, they'll direct you to someone else and go in circles for a few more hours before they tell you they can't help.	0
On January 3rd, 2022, I arrived at the airport in Acapulco to board my flight, upon arriving at the counter at Aeromexico, I presented my negative covid test result which was sent to me by the lab just an hour prior. I was told by a very rude, young girl that she was going to consult with a supervisor regarding my covid test result. I waited and waited, hauling my heavy suitcase back and forth to the counter and back. Finally the supervisor showed up and indicated that my covid test result though negative had expired by approximately one hour. She maintained that it had expired, that I wouldn’t be allowed to fly and no matter what I said to her she just stated that those were Aeromexico’s policies. I had to take a cab back to where I was staying and proceed to undergo another expensive covid test. I also asked if Aeromexico was going to book me on another flight and I was told that they were not going to honour my original round-trip fare, that I had to purchase a new ticket, which happened to be quite expensive. Needless to say we were ripped off.	0
They canceled my flight and did not notify me. I had to look the flight up myself to find out. Then they would only refund with a voucher that they won't send for 2 weeks and that expires in 12 months. So I will have already left Europe by the time I get it and will probably never be able to use it. I couldn't find a new flight within the same day because it was such short notice which screwed up plans for accommodation that I can't get refunded and so on. The stress and money they have cost me is crazy.	0
My wife had a very small hand bag, we had to pay for that 60 euros, so I gave the lady cash, and she answered that they don t accept cash, so i told her what if i don’t have a credit card! She answered me, Sir you can complain at Aegean airline or airport in a rude way. When we arrived to our destination, they broke our luggage.	0
2 months ago we decided to go to Lanzarote and we decided to pay extra to choose Aer Lingus and also extra for the early flight, got an email 24 hours ago saying the flight is rescheduled by 7 hours and just 10 minutes ago another e-mail saying Privilege airlines are taking over our flight. Obviously decided to read reviews online and they're shocking. They have 4 aging airplanes to boot too. I'll stick to Ryanair in future.	0
Berlin TXL to Frankfurt. Air Berlin has trouble with basic services and staff appears to be trained to deceive customer support requests. Flight AB6601 on 19 May cancelled without reason along with several other Air Berlin flights departing from Berlin TXL on that evening. No offer of compensation, no answers to calls, unfriendly and unhelpful staff at all counters. Due to the masses of people and the chaos at TXL at that time, checked-in baggage could not be reclaimed on that day. I had another flight in the morning next day from Frankfurt to Taiwan, which thanks to Lufthansa I was able to catch. My baggage is gone since even though I never even entered an Air Berlin plane but only checked-in. I cannot reach anybody at Air Berlin, emails remain unanswered.	0
Düsseldorf to Boston. Never fly this airline. The worst by far. They cancel flight and move people to different flights with different destinations. Then you are on your own. You have to buy new ticket to wherever your destination is. They hassle you to collect what you paid. No apologies or regret in their actions.	0
Stockholm to Cairo via Moscow. I travel a lot and this is considered one of the worst trips I had. Unorganised Company, bad service for the online check in, no bag drop so very long queue. Uncomfortable plane, no entertainment, bad quality of food with untrained workers on the plane. Very bad luggage service, had three bags and the three were delayed, one arrived one day after and the other two were announced sometimes as located and sometimes as missing. Two days after and didn't get my bags yet.	0
Sharjah to Muscat 2hrs delayed. Muscat to Sharjah 3.5hrs delayed. Bahrain to Sharjah 2.5 hrs delayed. Air Arabia has very bad on timings performance therefore if you go for business trip you should not fly with this airline.	0
Worst airline. We called to change our flight from 10/18/21 to 10/19/21 days before and the person who helped did not understand proper English because he confused Tuesday with Thursday. He booked on 10/21/21 and we called immediately to fix his error. Someone helped fix this but when we arrived at the airport on 10/19/21 before 1 pm the airport checked us in, registered our luggage, and gave us boarding passes. We went by our day trying to get by the next 4hrs and were sitting and the lounge. When it was boarding time they told us we could not board as our tickets were canceled by Aeromexico. They had us running around trying to get help so we wouldn't miss our flight and went to 4 different stations, had to get out of the airport after being checked in just so we can get our tickets fixed. The 2nd person which helped us did not confirm our tickets yet we received confirmation, etc. Aeromexico showed no type of sympathy, just put us on the next flight 8hrs our initial check-in and aside from this they lost our luggage (& lied to us that it was on the new flight, after asking them many times since they had checked it in earlier). Months later they reply back after submitting my claim and no sympathy whatsoever! Worst, they can't admit when they are wrong.	0
Horrible service! On my way to Mexico (Acapulco) the flight was delayed over than 2 hours, and lost my connection flight to my next destination. They paid for a hotel in Mexico City. But I had to pay for my own transportation and food. The same trip, days later, on my way back to the states the same problem the flight was delayed again and lost my other flight to Orlando! They put me again in another hotel, no transportation, no food. No bags cause they were on the connection flight. I was so mad and sad. I asked for another flight to other city near to Orlando cause I needed to get that day to my destination, I had a job and other responsibilities, and it was not my fault at all, can’t be possible that every single flight was delayed for hours, and they said not we can’t change destinations you have to buy your own tickets again if you want travel the same day. Or stay and leave the next day. I was not the only one, around 10 people had the same situation than me. I’ll never fly again with them.	0
I booked a round trip flight through this airlines Sao Paulo to Santo Domingo via Mexico City, I called to change the return date of the return flight, minus 1 day. They did that. But come flight day, I found out that that instead of just changing the return date, they also cancelled the departure flight. It became a one way flight and just the return, Sto Domingo to Brazil. And then I had to call them again to have them fix it, i had to be moved to a different day, so I had to change the succeeding flights I'm supposed to have after that flight that they cancelled. I also had to do multiple covid tests because of the rescheduling that happened. And they did not make it easy for me as well, when I called to have them book the flight that they cancelled, they keep on transferring me, refusing to give me a supervisor, and then hanging up on me, I called multiple times in a day, spent almost 2 hours just for them to fix it. I gave all the information they asked for. They phone reps are also rude, very unprofessional and keeps on insisting things on me, offering to change my flight dates, things that I already specifically asked to not do. They are also not apologetic of the inconvenience, of their mistake. of all the stress they brought me. None. They refuse to give any compensation for all the problems they brought. Then comes the flight day, the ticket is cancelled again. They never called me or sent email. No nothing. Then 1 hour after they cancelled the ticket, I received an email notice in the same format as a purchase confirmation, it says you're cleared off and ready for takeoff to Sto Domingo, and there was just a note at the very bottom, that they voided the ticket because they need information, asking me to call them back.	0
Terrible airline. Stuck at the Airport for 22 hours now. I spent an $60 on just food. No apologies. No refund. No food voucher. I have not seen my bags in 24 hours . Don't know if they still have them. They been pushing back every hour flight. Zero sleep.	0
I am frustrated by this airline. They have lost my bag in a direct 1 hour flight. It was scanned in the airport and since then, missing. I've not heard back from them unless I push them aggressively to call my from live chat, and even after that I hear the same status. I have tried everything, calling, filling forms, nothing has worked. Horrible customer service and horrible airline I've ever experienced. My bag had all my essentials and it was a relatively new bag itself. They are doing nothing to help me. I feel defeated.	0
First there is no way to check in electronically before arrival at the airport. And there was no way to contact the airline as we tried to find out if there was a luggage weight limit. And because we were booked on Aer Lingus, we could not check in electronically for the 2 united flights to follow. Second, we arrived 3 hours early for our flight, 5:30 am, but check in desk does not open until 6:30. So I could have slept another hour. Third and the most important we were given wrong information. The lady at the check in desk at Aer Lingus said she could only give us the boarding pass for the flight on Aer Lingus from Glasgow to Dublin. All of our flights were booked through United, United is the one that put us on Aer Lingus. She said she could not issue our boarding passes for the connecting flights from Dublin to Chicago and Chicago to LA. She told us we would have to go through the "transfer center" in Dublin. When we got to Dublin, there was an area for people to scan their boarding passes and continue on. We only had our passes from Glasgow to Dublin, so when we scanned the pass in Dublin, it rejected it and would not let us pass through. The people working there (Dublin airport employees) told us we would have to go through customs, downstairs and go to United check in desk, When we got through Irish customs and to the United desk, the lady said our flight was closed. She worked on her computer to get us on and we were given our boarding passes for Dublin to Chicago, and Chicago to LA. Her co-worker told us we might not make it to the gate on time. But then we had to clear Irish customs and security again, and then we had to go to USA pre clearance- security and customs again with long lines for all of these. I was very upset and anxious the longer it took, it seemed like one line or queue after another. I was picked out for advanced screening which took even more extra time. Our layover in Dublin was only 2 hours and we almost missed our flight. We were finally cleared and ended up running across Dublin airport to our gate. I was anxious, upset, tired, in physical pain and it caused stress between my husband and I. By the time I boarded the plane, I felt ill. (I am disabled) It all could have been avoided if we could have gotten our boarding passes either at the Aer Lingus check in gate or she could have told us to go to United at that time or allowed to check in electronically ahead of time, but United and Aer Lingus don't talk to each other.	0
Brussels to Toronto via Dublin. By far the worst company I have ever experienced. There is zero customer service. Not only they lost our luggage but it seems like they are not even dealing with the issue. We tried to reach out to the company (and the airports) by phone and by email dozens of times every single day for the last 7 days but no one is even answering. This company seems to have a massive operation issues with a lack of staff. Such a company shouldn't even be allowed to operate. If you think that Ryanair is the worst Irish company, trust me: you're wrong.	0
Munich to Stockholm via Dusseldorf. Horrible service (lengthy information on our flight in German, a very short in English, I did recognise Stockholm so I assumed the we might miss our connection). At airport no information on flight being delayed, no one in boarding booth, Lady in next booth didn't speak English. Stewardess spoke German and unintelligible English, never got a chance to buy a sandwich on either flights, never offered free coffee. I will never fly with airberlin again. I much more prefer Norwegian, great price with professional service (I fly regularly to UK with them).	0
Frankfurt to Berlin Tegel AB6588 is cancelled. Firstly they asked to wait for 2 more hours and then cancelled. The worst airline, terrible! I'm staying in a huge line to get my money back. Can't say anything about their service - I haven't got on board.	0
Copenhagen to Munich via Dusseldorf. I've just been swindled by Air Berlin. When I booked the trip, I was given one piece of baggage in the fare. When I called them to add a second piece they charged me $101 for it. I was stunned. I was expecting $25 - $35 perhaps for the second bag. They even sent me an email advertising extra baggage for 10 Euros if I booked it more than 30 hours out. That's a laugh. They must be into false advertising. Maybe I'm living in an unrealistic world, but with high status on United, I get two free bags on Lufthansa every time I use them and could have flown them more cheaply had I known about the excessive baggage fees. Moreover, I'm flying Air Berlin and Flybe to London City airport a few days later. They told me that I have to book my baggage at the airport because of the interline ticket, which is bound to be even more expensive. I will never fly Air Berlin again.	0
I used Aeroflot to travel from Havana to Istanbul return with a connecting flight in Moscow. Both of the experiences were horrible. First, they departed around 40 min late from Havana which caused me and several other passengers miss the connecting flight from Moscow to Istanbul. They were rude and not providing any decent help or assistance at Moscow airport. Their staff can dare to ask you "what do you want?" when you're trying to get help after stacking at the airport. We had to wait for the next flight to Istanbul for 4 hours. Yesterday I flew back to Havana from Istanbul. It departed around 1,5 hour late from Istanbul and there was 1 hour 50 minutes time in between the connecting flights. I barely caught the plane from Moscow to Havana, running all over the airport in Moscow with rude assistance ordering me like "run, you have 3 min, no more!". My ultimate destination was Cancun, Mexico so I took another flight from Havana (my luggage was checked in from Istanbul to Cancun directly so I didn't need to collect it until Cancun). When I arrived at Cancun, I found out that my luggage hasn't arrived. It was left in Moscow and supposed to be delivered next day (I'm still waiting as of Sep 12, flew on Sep 11. I will update my review). The meals served were horrible and planes uncomfortable. Old chairs, very tight leg space even for a short person like me, my TV barely working.	0
Dushanbe to Almaty. While they're inflight service was quite good, their ground service was deplorable. I was charged an outrageous fee for overweight baggage - 144 Euros. They refuse to let me carry my luggage cart onto the plane and required that I check it and charged me an additional 45 Euros.  Additionally they charged for food or beverage in the business class Lounge. 	0
Aeromexico took our families money and wouldn’t refund or replace our tickets after we couldn’t fly to Mexico during the start of COVID. We were suppose to fly in April 2020 and Mexico had shut down it’s border and didn’t open for a long time. Any company that is not willing to understand the circumstances of COVID and simply not refunding or helping in replacing purchased flights is crooked and is not to be trusted.	0
The airline sucks, but most workers we interacted during the trip were trying to compensate it. Avoid if you can. Never ever have connection in MEX airport. We booked Aeromexico because it was the only flight with couple hours layover from SFO to LIM. The airline changed the flight schedule a few times and we eventually had 11 hours layover in the MEX airport. Aeromexico did not offer refund, but only voucher. Aeromexico customer service offered VIP lounge as a compensation, but in the MEX airport we were asked to pay for it. On our way back we had a horrible experience of waiting in line about TWO hours to pass MEX custom for connection stopover. There were thousands packed in the line. COVID social distance was totally ignored. That was a perfect place to spread COVID or any other decease. Very poor communication: 80% in-flight and boarding communication was in Spanish. Most of the staff in MEX did not speak English. The airline did not communicate COVID documents requirements before the flight. Our forms filled before flight were turned down. In-flight entertainment system was broken or misconfigured - the US movies did not have English subtitles.	0
Absolutely disgusting behaviour by the staff whilst going to board our plane in Venice. We were rushed to show our boarding passes and Vaccination forms and other forms in paper form or on our phones, The check-in staff weigh ours and everyone's luggage. Our luggage was 7.8kg, but because I had a very small bag inside which was the only thing that would fit inside it, containing just my wallet, glasses, we had to pay extra 50 euros. They said that we had to take only one thing on board with an Economy Light ticket. Which was strange as when we initially booked our tickets we boarded our plane to Venice with the same things.  My husband was told that if he did not pay 50 euros to put his hand cabin luggage then we were not allowed on the plane.  Lots of passengers had connecting flights and missed them as the flight was late leaving because of all this mess before boarding the plane. It was a complete nightmare, The police came and tried to calm the situation. The Italian checkin staff did not have a clue how to speak properly to the passengers who were upset and stressed about the whole situation. Me and my husband will not ever fly with Aegean again.	0
I am sitting at home writing this review. I should have landed in Barcelona 30 minutes ago. I perfectly understand that operational matters can ground aircraft which according to Aer Lingus was the case with EI564 on the 25th June. However the manner with which a cancellation took place showed neither respect or care for customers. Notification of the cancellation arrived on my cellphone 3 hours and 30 minutes from departure. This did not allow me time to make any alternative arrangement.  If you are dropping a bag arrive 3.5 hours before departure. Informing me on the way to a chaotic airport in free fall did not allow for this. The lack of joined up thinking is disgraceful. The alternative given to me was a pitiful attempt to retrieve a bad situation Aer Lingus offered this rerouting alternative. Dublin to LHR 1400 on the 26th June. An onward connection on the 27th june LHR to BCN with BA at 6AM. Make your own arrangements in London.	0
Bucharest to Miami vis Sibiu, Munich. My worst experience with an airline so far. 3 weeks before departure, they changed dates and hours - technically I could choose to get my money back, but buying from another company with such short notice would have been much more expensive - what I paid for was Bucharest to Miami with one stop, what I got was the same with 3 stops - what I paid for was Miami to Bucharest with one stop, what I got was the same with 2 stops. I had to book a hotel room for one night in Berlin because the flights were not in the same day after the change they made (still waiting for a refund), and they failed to deliver the luggage in Miami. It arrived after 2 days - out of 4 Air Berlin flights, 3 were delayed by approx 1 hour each. AirBerlin call-center is bad. They say on the web-site is 24h, but that's not true. If you call them when they don't work, they don't say come back at operating hours. They just let you listen to bad music indefinitely on your own expense. and when they do answer, they even give incorrect answers (like saying Bucharest to Munich is a direct flight, which was certainly not.	0
Frankfurt to Palma de Mallorca. Reserved seat was ignored, it looks not unusual. My family booked 4 seat together beforehand in website. But boading pass we got in airport forced us to seat far location each other. One lady kindly changed her seat for my son 8 years old to my next seat. She was forced to seat separately with her husband instead. My wife and daughter 11 years old are forced to seat one by one separately.	0
I recently flew from Bangkok to Warsaw with Etihad. No problems with the Etihad flight but they code share with Air Berlin for the Abu Dhabi to Berlin leg and again Air Berlin on the Berlin to Warsaw leg. The fun began when I was informed my Berlin to Warsaw flight was cancelled resulting in me hanging around for hours for the next flight - ok that's a pain but not the end of the world. What happened next just proved to me how useless Air Berlin are. Having arrived in Warsaw I then found out they had lost all of my 3 bags, the handling company in Warsaw could tell me nothing because they rely on Air Berlin for information and I was one of over 100 people who had the same problem . I tried to get information on what was going on but you can not - there is no telephone no to speak to someone just a website that tells you they are looking for the bags, which is just frustrating not helpful. After 4 days of wearing the same clothes all my bags were found but no offer of an apology or compensation for me having to spend 4 days with no clothes to change and no toiletries to freshen up.	0
Prague to Berlin. The worst customer service I have experienced in 30 years of global travel. I and thousand of other had their luggage lost at Tegel airport this easter weekend. No customer service. You are directed to WISAG who they have outsource the baggage handling to. All WISAG does is direct you to a iPad and make you file your own report. Huge line up, hours long, only one clerk. They never email you to tell you the status of your baggage, they never answer the phone numbers given, they never answer the emails sent. It's been 4 days zero response. Called the Air Berlin reservation number and they say call WISAG. WISAG is totally non responsive. So basically Air Berlin says we don't care not our problem it is your problem. Destroyed my easter weekend. Flying home without luggage. Only shopping day during the holiday was Saturday which I spent replacing cloths. Air Berlin has provided a shameful lack of service. I read they delayed there long haul flights because they have a new company handling their luggage. They have been on the job since March 26 and they are even more useless than the old company. T	0
London to Shanghai via Moscow. They delayed my flight and I missed my original flight in Moscow. They proceed to give no information and are not helpful. They changed my ticket from Moscow to Beijing to Shanghai causing me to have a longer flight. The flight to Beijing was annoying and bad, Aeroflot had previously told me my luggage will be be in Shanghai. However, we asked at Beijing if they know where our luggage is. The Beijing staff proceeded to help us look for it and it was in lost and found.	0
Istanbul to Moscow. Everything was ok on my first trip, but while I was coming back it was the worst flight that I ever had. I will never fly with Aeroflot again.  When I got in JFK it was 11 and it took almost half an hour to go out. It was around 11.30 pm I was waiting for my baggage I waited there till 01.30 am for my baggage, I asked one of the employees to see what was going on. They said my baggage never came to NY and it was still in Moscow. I understand it could happen they had 10 hrs to let us know (it took 10 hrs from us to come from Moscow). It’s been 4 days but I haven’t received my baggage.	0
Worst travelling experience of my life. I booked a flight with them (only because options this year was limited). They cancelled it a week later and refused to refund me. So I had a voucher for my next flight but I could not apply it online. Had to spend hours on the phone to use it. On the flight day in Mexico City, the plane was going round on the tarmac. The captain announcing that they were waiting for the weather to clear up before taking off even though it was sunny. Then they parked the plane and asked 17 volunteers to get off because the plane was overloaded. By the time volunteers came forward, got off, with their baggage we were hours late all the while waiting in the plane. But that's not the worst. Once I finally arrived, my two pieces of luggage were missing and I was not the only one. So they threw them out along with the volunteers. One luggage was delivered to me a week later. The second one I never got back 3 weeks later. You never know when you arrive and if your belongings will follow. They have no luggage service (just one email address I wrote to multiple times along with their legal services) and never bother to answer. Nightmare. They treat customers like livestock.	0
I'm a European citizen who was planning a trip to the USA and Mexico. However, because of a travel ban imposed by the US government, I am not allowed to travel. My booking is a non-refundable one. However, I want to travel, but I am not allowed to. I explained the situation to Aeromexico, and requested a voucher, which was denied. It not my fault that I am not allowed to travel, but Aeromexico doesn't care about it. They've already got my money, so they don't really care about giving me a chance to use the service I already paid for, once the travel ban is lifted. The customer care service is of extremely low quality. If you want to lose your money go ahead and book with this airline. By seeing all those negative reviews, it seems apparent to me that Aeromexico has financial difficulties.	0
I haven't travelled yet but I am dreading it already. You simply can't make any changes online and when you call them, their phone system is insane. They speak English but their lines are muffled and unclear, take forever to answer then charge you double the cost of the ticket online because you called a call centre, but they dont give you any option to do it online anyway. So antiquated. Be sure your flights you book are 100% what you need because making changes after the event is near on impossible without being robbed financially!	0
Absolutely terrible. Flight cancelled same night tickets bought and refund request takes weeks to complete. Then receive an email saying my refund request has been cancelled as I have applied for a credit voucher even though I haven’t? Do not recommend.	0
Our problem began when they cancelled our flight, we spent hours upon hours on the phone trying to get new flights but they transferred us time after time and we were on hold for hours at a time. When they fixed our flights they said they couldn’t give us seats together but to talk to them when we check in and they promised it would be resolved. We were with 2 children (one only 7 and the other 11), and one child with epilepsy. When we checked in they gave us only two seats together and the others scattered across the plane. We explained that we at least needed three sets of 2 seats together since we were traveling with children and a persons with a neurological disorder. Again, they were rude unhelpful and passed it along again and told us to talk to the gate attendant before boarding and they again promised it would be sorted. The third woman was the rudest I’ve ever experienced, she finally told us we could ask the people on the plane. Luckily two people were willing to switch.	0
New York JFK to Duesseldorf. The worst service in a business class cabin I've received. There was nothing that I could say positive about this flight 7481 of Air Berlin departing April 8 from JFK to Dusseldorf. Arrived at JFK with more than 3 hours in advance. There were people in the priority /business line waiting because the two staff that attended the site, were gone for a break , and no other attendance paid attention to us. Suddenly another travelers that arrived after us were allowed to go through, and when I complained, a very young man responded that they were attending first the Berlin passengers (was no way this gentleman could know, without asking, whether I was going also to Berlin?) When we arrived at the time of boarding (we were told at the counter that there was going to be a 25 minutes delay), we had to wait for an hour without anybody explaining what was going on. We later found out that they had to switch the aircraft, and make the catering. When we finally boarded, never were we were approached by our names, I had to wear my jacket, since nobody came to ask for it. Food (bad catering), but that was not all. My dinner selection was Rissotto with a pinot grigio the staff brought me the rissotto  with a red wine when I told her that that was not my wine, and that I order the grigio, I think I spoke in esperanto, since she had no idea what I was talking about: I said white wine, and she said ok, and she never came back with the wine. Tire of waiting, I sipped a horrible red wine, and my wife took it and changed it for a chardonnay she was having. Dessert with the whole tray occupied with the other plates. The cabin was a mess, the flight staff spent the flight running, coming and going, and that is the reason why I did not have the chance to request for some better treatment. My only comfort was that this was a 6 hours flight. At the end, when we were to land the flight attendant asked me to put my jacket back since I couldn't have it in my hands. A business ticket with an economy class treatment.	0
Moscow to New York. Upon arrival to JFK on August 9, 2018 I haven’t received my baggage. I was told that they will contact and deliver it to me within 24-48 hours. It’s been almost 4 days. I haven’t received any phone calls. I still have no idea where is my baggage. The number I was provided doesn’t works I left hundreds of voicemails. No one got back to me. I still don’t even have cloth to change and I have no idea what is going on.	0
Barcelona to Guangzhou via Moscow. Only 1000 RUB meal voucher for my missed connection as the first flight was 2 hours late. They only rebooked me the same flight on the next day but refused to provide any overnight accommodation or compensation. The service clerk’s attitude was rather arrogant.	0
My partner and I had our first flight with Aeromexico from Amsterdam to Mexico city and then to Puerto Vallarta on 18-19/Aug. There were delays (30-60min.) and the cabin crew was rude and unaccommodating. We don't speak Spanish and it was obvious that they had a problem with that. Especially one lady who was really nice to all Spanish speaking passengers but when I asked her something I got just one word answer in a really impolite way. Another flight with Aeromexico was supposed to be from Puerto Vallarta to Mexico City and from there to Vancouver on 25/Aug. As the first flight got delay almost 3 hours we weren't able to catch our second flight. Lady at the PV airport was unhelpful, and after we approached her, she told us that we had just 2 options. Stay one more night and take the same route next day, or take the first flight to Mexico city and wait there for the second flight to Vancouver till next day. We've been told that it wasn't Aeromexico's fault therefore they won't provide us hotel or meals. After we got out, to our surprise our original flight to Vancouver just began boarding right at the next gate. We happily get there to realize that we can not get in. Why? Nobody knows again. At first they told us because of "weight and balance" after that because they didn't have available seats and so on. It was two of us and another 15-20 people including families with small children who weren't able to get in. We were trying to understand this situation but after 30 minutes no reasonable explanation came. We accepted vouchers for hotel and meals as at the airport in Mexico city miraculously could provide them. Next day after we got back to the airport we were trying to get confirmation about the flight delay as we supposed to be already in the work in that time but we were stuck in Mexico. Of course customer service at the airport was as bad as the lady at our first flight so we got nothing. Finally 50 minutes after our flight was scheduled we were finally boarding, still not sure if we can get in this time. We got in and after almost an hour we started rolling and captain is speaking to us. Unfortunately we had to have a stop in Tijuana to get fuel. In the end this flight had 3 hours delay (+24 hours). I never heard sorry or any kind of apology till this moment. One more thing, after we got vouchers for meals and hotel we've been told that we can catch Aeromexico shuttle in front of the T2 gate which take us to the hotel. We've been there for almost 30 min. and what we've seen was just shuttle for crew. At the hotel we've learned that we should have vouchers for taxi too but we didn't have them so we paid 2 fairs with taxi by ourselves. I would like to see my money for this last flight back but after I read many bad reviews about Aeromexico I think I'll never see them again but I'm more then sure that I will never ever fly again with Aeromexico.	0
I had two flights with round trip and both times we were late. The first trip did not matter because Guadalajara was my first destination but return was crucial because I had another flight to take after landing in Salt Lake City. We did not even have an hour to board the next plane and to add insult to injury Delta Air Lines had departure was at 11:30 am and I arrive at the terminal at 11:27. Me and another person are left stranded today until 10:10 pm, unbelievable.	0
I have flown on many airlines and have had few problems. I consider myself pretty easy going but Aeromexico really put my nerves to the test. I will just make a list: -My luggage was broken into and my jewellery stolen during my 5 hour layover in Mexico City on my way to Los Cabos. I reached out to the complaints department but not surprisingly no one has responded (weeks later). Upon my return to Toronto, I once again had a short layover for 2 hours in Mexico City. While lining up at the gate to get on the aircraft, the staff closed the door while 15 passengers remained behind standing, me and my family included. it was stressful, messy and confusing and the staff said nothing to us about what was happening, they just pointed a finger for us to go to customer service. That's when we discovered we had been bumped off our flight for the next 24 hours and they couldn't even guarantee us that we wouldn't be bumped again the next day. The customer service rep. explained that we couldn't go on the flight because of weight/balance issues, and that's when my husband and I came to the conclusion that passengers are being kicked off the flight in order to make room for more lucrative cargo. We collected our luggage for the 24 hour delay because after my initial experience, we did not trust our luggage sitting in the Airport with out them being rummaged through and items stolen. When we received our luggage, my bag was heavily damaged and a wheel completed ripped off so I could barely manage rolling it around the airport and to our hotel. The next day we checked in 3 hours before our flight because we wanted to avoid any issues. The line up at the gate was a crowded mess, it felt like I was going to get trampled on. Once seated and on the plane the crew made an announcement that a few passengers would not be coming on the plane again and that their luggage needed to be removed from the plane. So the airline was again doing to others what we experienced the day before. At that point, the passenger sitting behind me told the flight attendant that she just saw the ground crew taking her bag off the plane even though she was still on it, at which point the flight attendant left for a couple minutes and when he came back the plane just started to pull out and he said there was nothing he could do about it at this point. Once we arrived in Toronto Pearson Airport, and made it through customs, my husband and I discovered that our luggage was also taken off the plane in Mexico City. After filling out the necessary paperwork, the Aeromexico luggage attendant informed us that we should have our luggage delivered to us no later than Tuesday September 7th. It has been 4 days now since we landed, with multiple phone calls and emails made on my part, no one from Aeromexico has contacted us about its whereabouts. And after having my personal items stolen out of my luggage on my 5 hour layover in Mexico City, I can only imagine what I will or will not have left in my luggage if Aeromexico ever returns our luggage to us. However, my daughters luggage WAS on the plane, and upon returning home she discovered she still had all her items in her bag but she also had extra items. Shirts and skirts that did not belong to her, which means the baggage staff at Aeromexico is opening peoples luggage to look for valuables and is just stuffing personal items back haphazardly in random suitcases. That tells me that many people are missing items.	0
Never fly Aeromexico! I cancelled my reservation and they told me they will issue a refund in one year!  I tried to use an electronic voucher issued by Aeromexico and on the screen it appeared that it was used and the amount to be charged to my credit card was lower. A higher amount was actually charged and when I called to resolve this they said that they will issue a refund on a valid voucher in 12 months' time. I told that that it's unacceptable and cancelled the entire reservation. The refund for the entire reservation will also be issued in 12 month's time. With Aeromexico charging customers and not providing service, will it exist next year?	0
I have been travelling with Aegean for years while I am a golden member on the Miles and More program. Since the beginning of the pandemic the Aegean customer service and operation standards has dramatically deteriorated. I recently travelled to Greece from Manchester and experienced two flight time changes from Aegean. My original flight schedule had a departure time at midnight from Manchester arriving at Athens Airport 6am local time with a connection flight at 7am to Thessaloniki. Two weeks after I booked the ticket Aegean changed the departure time for the Athens-Thessaloniki flight to 10am. I accepted the reschedule taking into account the accumulated tiredness from the overnight flight. A week before the departure Aegean decided to flight schedule from midnight to 20.30 arriving in Athens at 02.30 in morning, resulting overall on an 8 hours transit overnight at Athens airport. I found this inconsiderate and disrespectful to their customer. Apparently this is the way Aegean has been operating all their flights from Manchester since the beginning of June 2021 however they do not correct the flight times so to be aware prior to booking what is the accurate travel schedule. It is very sneaky, disrespectful and an immoral attitude to let passengers struggle with the unpredictable flight times. Still today nothing has changed on their booking system to correct the flight times	0
Check-in at Heathrow took 30' and economy class was moving much quicker.  No lounges at Heathrow was open (I guess due to covid) but it would be nice to be informed beforehand and not at check-in. ( maybe when purchasing the ticket?) Boarding was not done in any particular order but all passengers at once. 4) Just after boarding was completed one of the ground crew came into the business section and informed us that they were two meals short and two business passengers were not going to have a meal. In Business class and with no lounges at the airport. When arrived in my final destination (SKG) my luggage was damaged. When complained I was told that if the suitcase was ruined I was able to request a repair/new one. The next day I raised all these issues with Aegean and they said there was a mistake with the meal and I was given only excuses. Of course, mistakes happen but in my opinion, when a reputable airline makes any mistakes or mishandlings they should own their mistakes and offer redemptions.	0
Absolutely terrible, we missed our flight and they didn’t make accommodations. Missed our connecting fly due to our Aer Lingus flight being delayed. Got to Boston spoke with a representative and basically said “sorry there’s nothing we can do” and sent us on our merry way. Absolutely took no ownership of their mistake. Screwed up and just let it screwed up. Will never fly them again. Rate 0 out of 10.	0
This was an absolute disaster. They lost my luggage and said they would contact me, but they didn't. I had to contact them and they told me the bag was on the way to Dublin, so I went to the airport to collect the baggage. On the spot, I had to wait 4,5 hours until someone helped me, there was a huge shortage of staff and no one could help me. In the end, it turned out that the bag wasn't even there and that I had wasted my time. They told me that "the fact that the bag has been loaded onto the plane doesn't mean that it will arrive". A week later they finally called me to say that my bag would arrive in Berlin on the next day. To my question if they would deliver the bag to my address, the least they could do to compensate for this nightmare, they said it depended on how much work there would be at the airport in Berlin. A week has passed since then and no one called me, emailed me and no one's picking up the phone. I still haven't received my bag. This airline is a nightmare, I will never fly with them again.	0
I am a mother traveling alone with my infant son, and Aer Lingus has made our experience an absolute nightmare. I called to request a bassinet seat for my baby to be able to sleep on the 7 hour flight from Chicago to Dublin (8 hours on the way back), and I was told to contact Special Assistance through their website, which I did. I was then told via email that I was assigned row 30 on flight EI122, and was told this was a bassinet row. When I boarded the plane (which was two hours delayed), I arrived at my seat, baby in my arms, to discover that row 30 is a bulkhead row but nota bassinet row. The only bassinet row on the aircraft I was on is row 9. The flight attendants told me not much could be done, but finally we begged to switch with someone in row 9 and someone was kind enough to do it. However, I had to move back before landing so that the original passenger in row 9 could alight the plane first, so had to lug myself, my infant son, and all our stuff back and forth three separate times.  While onboard my flight to Chicago, I discovered eventually that my seat's media system was broken, the remote for it did not work, so that even though the screen seemed to be fine, I could not control anything/make anything play on it. This meant I could not watch anything, could not listen to anything, could not even call the flight attendant, turn on my own light. When I was finally able to alert a flight attendant and let them know, they brushed me off and said they would make a note of it, offering nothing else to help or compensate. I had no media available to me after I was able to get my baby to sleep in the bassinet they provided, which, by the way, is a beat up cardboard box lined with airline pillows, and airline blanket, and strapped in with straps that go above the baby's feet and right above the baby's head. Far from a nice set up. On the day before my original flight back from Dublin to Chicago, I tested positive for Covid 19. While I've been asymptomatic, I understand that the US requires negative tests to re-enter the country, and while it was an unfortunate situation, I anticipated being able to handle it. I did not  anticipate that Aer Lingus would have no policy for dealing with this kind of a situation. I once again waited on hold with them for over an hour to be told that in a situation like this, all they can offer is for you to change your flight for a large sum of money (over 450 euro in my case). They offer no flexibility which is impossible for a situation like this one. I can't imagine I am the only one (I'm probably one of hundreds if not thousands) who is having to reschedule their flight because they will not be let into the country due to unexpected test results. But Aer Lingus offer no sort of flight credit or flexibility, even though I have no way of knowing when I will test negative and be let back into the US. It could be in two days time, it could be in twenty days time, and Aer Lingus only seeks to make you change your flight over and over again, charging you more and more money each time, even though this is something completely out of the passenger's control. I finally booked a flight seven days away, and just hoped and prayed I would be negative by then, also knowing I would miss a good amount of work and income by being out of the country	0
Munich to Warsaw via Berlin. Air Berlin was late about an hour at boarding, at departure 2hrs. In Berlin I had to transfer to connecting flight to Warsaw, which was to depart 30 min before the first flight's late arrival. Hustling off the plane, there was no bus to bring us to the terminal, which literally was 15m away. After 5 min, there was a bus to bring us these 15m. Inside the terminal, I was running to catch the next flight. It took about 5 min, just to notice me boarding the plane right next to the one I came in with. After having seated, we were told that we need to wait for another 30min because one passenger did not show up but his luggage was loaded, so it had to be unloaded. About 2h late departure. Arrived in Warsaw, I was told my luggage did not arrive, because there was too short time in Berlin to transfer my luggage. Air Berlin staff knew this already in Berlin, but decided to tell us upon arrival in Warsaw. However, how was there 30 min to unload luggage but not to load transfer luggage? Being left without christmas presents and without any clothes one day before christmas, I was also told that before 2 days after christmas I cannot really expect my luggage. Thank you Air Berlin for ruining christmas. Never again.	0
Sochi to Barcelona via Moscow. Lost luggage. Had 2 flights through SVO in Moscow and they lost my luggage both times. The 2nd time they finally delivered 1 bag and had no idea what happened to the 2nd one. Do not book a flight that has a transit connection as your luggage will not make it! I have many colleagues who had the same problem - over 50% of them didn’t get their bags on the flight with them.	0
My expensive return ticket to Bangkok included 5 hours in a seat some charter airlines would be ashamed of, the trip in the opposite direction with unadvertised stop in Ho Chi Minh. The flight was moved forward 15 mins in Bangkok but failed to inform me, but they were late anyway for the original take off time. I won't discuss the food on board. 	0
We are not able to fly out for vacation. Aeromexico will not reschedule, hold or refund. Our tickets where $589.06 and they will do nothing to help. I will never book Aeromexico again.	0
First- checking in for our flight was a nightmare. We understand that Aeromexico is a partner with Delta, and with Delta, we don't pay for our checked baggage because we hold the Delta Reserve and Gold memberships, etc. Either way, Aeromexico said that they wouldn't honor but 1/6 bags to be checked for free (there were 6 of us traveling). I spend a significant amount of money with Delta and have many perks for a good reason, so I couldn't understand that if Aeromexico decides to be "partners" with a large company, then they should honor the rewards given to the customers. So we had to pay for 5 bags to be checked, and was told to "take it up with Delta." This is poor and awful customer service and we will never travel using Aeromexico again. Our flight had a rough take off and landing.	0
Our couple and my friend couple had a transit at Mexico City coming on the way back from Cancun. We are only 45 minutes away to board the plane and the Aeromexico security lady told us to go out and test the covid test again because they don’t accept the covid done and signed by doctor from the hotel where we lives . The test was done professionally and appropriately by the hotel and I can tell by my medical professional background . We told them that we are afraid to miss the flight but she insist for us to go do the test . We have to pay about $41 for the test again . But the test center they recommended didn’t even do appropriately . They only swab on one side of nostril and not even PCR test which is more specific screening. We have to wait to gets the test result for about 20 minutes . We missed the flight when we come back through the airport security. We went and saw the airline receptionist and they told us to go out of the security gate again to see supervisor . Supervisor named ( Darion ) is very unprofessional. His expression says he doesn’t care and he didn’t even say sorry. He said our covid test at the hotel is invalid because it is expired. But the test was done actually within 72 hours period according to all the airline covid requirement. He literally lie to our face. My other’s friend and her five family members takes Alaska airline on the same day and they accept the same covid test done by the hotel. But they refund the air ticket and we have to stay at the airport all night long to wait for another flight. They didn’t even give us the hotel fees. We have go through security twice which is a horrible experience. This will be the first and last time to travel with Aeromexico. I would not recommend Aeromexico to any of my friend and family members .	0
Worst air travel experience ever. Stranded at LAX for 12 hours because of flight delay and schedule change. Then a 3 hour layover in Mexico city became 13 hour layover. Luggage wasn't checked all the way to final destination. Then had to pick up luggage and denied check in because our flight was 13 hours away. Food was horrible as well. Chicken was rubbery. Steak was dry. Ice cream was melted. Avocado was unripened. Only good thing was the orange juice. Also got a dirty blanket even though it was sealed in plastic. 1st and last time flying Aeromexico.	0
Airline is not organized at all. They lost my luggage and made a report and they keep blaming each other. Ruined my trip to Mexico because had no clothes to wear having to spend money for items that were in my luggage. I'm home still calling for my luggage and they keep telling me to call back. Hope this review helps someone who's planning to travel with this airline. Be careful with your luggage.	0
I don’t recommend this airline to you. Because of Coronavirus my flight was cancelled and I didn’t receive anything. They didn’t reply to my emails and calls. I am very disappointed and I will never fly with this airline anymore.	0
The cabin crew were atrocious on our flight back from Dublin to JFK. They were, inattentive, rude and disrespectful. As we were taking off in the late afternoon, I decided to catch some sleep after takeoff. I was jostled awake by a flight attendant as my seat’s position was reclined too far for dinner services to be served. This attendant’s words were, “I’m going to need you to return your seat to its standard position for inflight meal service.” There was no, excuse me. To make matters worse, neither me nor my partner were offered meals. They forgot of our existence.  All in all it was just a terrible experience.	0
The crew was great. Working with the company was a total nightmare. Two of my older daughters tested positive for Covid at the airport. Aer lingus employees refused to even help them. By the time they finally could get in touch with an Aer Lingus employee, they basically said tough luck. Said that they had missed the refund window by 5 minutes. So they ended up booking flights on a US airlines several days later for a lot of money. The rest of us tried to book flights on Aer Lingus several days later when we would test negative. One of our travel companions spent 3 hours on the phone just to get the flight changed for several hundreds of dollars. It has been a total nightmare working with them. That is if you can even get in touch with them. And don’t even get me started about the check in at the Dublin airport. It was horrible.	0
Tokyo Narita to Sochi, Russia via Moscow Sheremetyevo. Check-in staff in Tokyo was pleasant and helpful. The  A330 from Tokyo to Moscow had an average interior, seatback entertainment was average. Onboard food was terrible, I wish I'd taken more snacks with me before boarding. Flight attendants seemed pleasant. Lavatory was dirty. Upon arrival at Moscow Sheremetyevo, I was completing the International to domestic transfer process when an Aeroflot staff walked up to me, grabbed my boarding pass with baggage tags attached and ripped them up. I was told that because I was traveling with a musical instrument (violin), I could not board the next flight with anything else other than the violin (I also had a computer, camera and Ipad in a personal bag). They threatened to cancel my onward journey if I didn't pay 7500 rubles to check my empty personal bag.  Why wasn't this rule enforced at check-in? I would have dealt with it then without the threats and disrespect from employees in Moscow. It was by far the worst experience I've ever had in over 15 years of traveling frequently for work.	0
When my family and I attempted to board our connecting flight we were stopped saying our Covid tests would not work and we had to be retested. I received valid Covid tests for me and my family and the airline refused to accept them staying that they "cannot be from a doctor" and can only come from a laboratory. The website from cdc.gov says nothing of the sort and even allows at home rapid antigen tests as long as they meet certain criteria. Because Aeromexico would not accept my perfectly valid tests I and my family had to be retested at the airport, spending another 2300 pesos, missed our original connecting flight and spent over eight hours in the airport waiting for another flight to our final destination. The staff and crew were rude to me and my family, they did not have a valid reason for refusal other than being obviously money hungry. I will not recommend anyone use Aeromexico and I will personally never use them again. Do to this poor experience it affected all other aspects of the flight from seating comfort to snack quality. When we asked to see the supervisor they refused until it was too late to change anything. If I could give less than 1 star I would.	0
Terrible airline!! Trying to submit the form for my emotional support dog but it says that I am out of 48 hours window of my flight which is not true. I am flying 17 July, 7.29 am. On the website it says that I must submit the form within 48 hours. My flight is in 18 hours and I can’t fly without my dog. I called the customer support yesterday, the guy just told me that he can’t help me, that he just sells tickets, and I need to write an email to connect with real customer support. What is that, he can’t help, and I need to wait for the email response. But no one still has answered. Still my dog is not added. I tried to call today, this time the lady tried to help me, she confirmed that there is an error on your official website, and provided me with the email to submit my documents to add my dog to the flight. But no one has responded! Additionally I received an email from Aeromexico to check in before the flight which isn’t possible too, the system shows an error! What is that, your website provides with the false info and doesn’t work at all! Aeromexico do something about it. Now I am stuck with my dog in Cancun and don’t know what to do.	0
First of all we had book through Delta Airlines a few months back and we received an email that our flight had been changed to Aeromexico. We thought no big deal. We get to IAH in Houston Texas for our family flight to Cancun Mexico with a 3 hour layover in Mexico City. We go to check our bags and we were told that we have to pay for baggage (First Strike because we are Delta Sky Miles Members we thought that because Delta switched us that our baggage would still be free.... Nope $130 one way) Okay so our frustration level has raised up. Now the only thing that was not Aeromexico's fault was that we had a traveler with us that thought the US Passport Card was good for air travel well it's not and the rude with no compassion agent at check in let us know in more ways than one. We just asked her a simple question and we were told not to waste her time with questions (Strike two and Anger Level just went up a notch) We checked our bags and received our boarding passes all the way through to Cancun. Meanwhile we had to arrange to have our one traveler transportation home. We ran to the gate and the agent that checked us in was at the gate and once again very rude to our family which we never said a word to her that would make anyone treat a customer like she treated us. We boarded and arrived in Mexico City. As our family was getting off the flight I wanted to see what gate our connecting flight to Cancun would be and there was no gate number or seat assignments. We never noticed it before we left Houston because of that situation. Well on our tickets they all had standby. Anger level just went up again. We figured out what gate our flight to Cancun was and went to the gate and I went up to the agent and asked why were we put on standby? He said no clue but we were not going to get on the flight because it was overbooked. Now we had arranged for pickup in Cancun for 8:30pm and so we have to figure out what flight we will have to get on if any to get to Cancun. Lucky thing Delta had a little customer service desk and they were able to get us on the next flight out which was an hour later and we were able to get a hold of our transportation. We finally arrived in Cancun around 10:00pm. Trip from hell over. Now this is what I don't understand. I have flown all over the world and have had hundreds of connecting flights and I have never in my over 30 years of flying ever been issued a standby ticket for a connecting flight.	0
Extremely overpriced, rude staff, no Covid-19 measures for boarding and disembarkation and they are always looking for sneaky ways to charge you more. I wouldn’t recommend and will never travel with Aegean again.	0
Horrific check-in experience. I have always known Aer Lingus is not the best, but they were, at least, funny and polite in the past. Business-class ticket, priority check-in desks - there was something that I assumed is an issue with their App and thus I was waiting in line vs using the baggage drop-off (which was faster in economy). First I realized that the new so-called Platinum Service by DAA, is utilizing the Business Class check in desks, then I realized there are only 2 of them available, after probably an hour of waiting I got to the check-in desk and was told I need to fill out another form (which I had already done, and I was able to provide with veriFly another app, however, the lady kept on telling me I need to show email verification. I gave her all my information and never got email verification. IMHO she was doing this so the DAA stewards of the Platinum offering can keep on using the check-in, or she was misinformed/ trained on the virtual check-in process.	0
Dublin to London. The staff at the front desk was incredibly rude after I left my bag at the baggage claim area. They told me it would be several hours before someone could retrieve my bag and the woman had an extremely unfriendly and nasty tone. She told me I would not be able to speak to a manager because everyone was “too busy” -  horrendous service I will never fly with them again.	0
Rhodes to Paris via Berlin. They made me pay a fee for lugagge (115€). They did not deliver the luggage on time, I had to wait 5 days and call the airport every day. My luggage arrived 5 days later damaged and my kitesurf board that was in the bag as broken. After contacting them for 5 months they still never did anything, they did not even send me a single message or gave me a call. They don't care about their customers.	0
Bought tickets from this company. I received a letter to my mail that my flights were rescheduled for another date. Transfers on these tickets are simply not possible. I've been trying to contact the airline for four days now. I called the phone but the call does not go through, I write to the mail but no one answers. It turns out that I just lose my money. This is the worst company I have ever dealt with. If you want to lose money buy a ticket from this company.	0
Worst experience I’ve had! They charged my card $400 for upgraded seats that I never got. They refused to give me customer service. Staff in the Cancun airport are the rudest I have ever met. Never flying with them again.	0
Terrible check-in experience! The line is ridiculously long for no reason other than the staff is extremely incompetent and slow. They take more than 30 minutes with one passenger and then socialize after for another 10 minutes before calling anyone up. Yes the staff is lost, unprofessional and have absolutely no idea what they are doing. Last time I fly with this airline.	0
Worst airline ever. They make everything difficult. I am trying to postpone a trip in May 2021 due to Covid and they don't care. Aeromexico doesn't care about health and safety or their customers. They should not make it such a difficult stressful ordeal to conduct business with them.  They will never give you the customer service you deserve.	0
This is the worst company to fly with! When covid happened, Aeromexico cancelled my ticket and gave me a voucher. I was supposed to go to a wedding and the wedding had passed. I requested multiple times for a refund. I kept getting refused and it’s been hard for me because I cannot afford to travel due to the current situations and I am suffering financially!	0
Aegean is getting clients to book flights that they proceed to cancel a few hours later. Instead of refunding the money, they either propose to transfer you to more expensive flights or issue vouchers that take ridiculously long time to be issued.	0
Horrible customer service. Cancelled my ticket due to pandemic, moved to new dates without adding the seats and the baggage booked which was at an extra cost. For 3 days I have called without exaggeration over 50 times. No response on their phone numbers. I don't know how this could get any worse of an experience.	0
This flight was cancelled by Aegean and I am still waiting for my refund.  Where is my money?	0
Check in at Gatwick was slow (average 15 mins per passenger - there is a clock at least one had to wait 25 minutes and a family had to queue 3 times to get check in) that although I was issued boarding passes and went directly to security the machine refused me entry because the flight was closed. The check in staff were a sub-contractor and there was no Aer Lingus representative at the airport. Calls to Aer Lingus took at least 30 mins wait and several attempts. I was charged a $200 change fee and had to spend GBP28 to bus to Heathrow. Now my calls for recompense do not go through, nor does online chat get any response despite being online for several hours. This is not service at all. It is effectively a shut out.	0
Aer Lingus lost my baggage on March 26th. The lost baggage was located the same day (March 26th) in Paris. For 14 days Aer Lingus has been unable to simply put that bag in a plane and have it flown to Toronto. After about 20 phone calls and 3 emails Aer Lingus stills says to be apologetic about my situation but the tone of voice of every single baggage claim representative says different. Aer Lingus doesn't offer a phone number to escalate claims nor give the option to email anybody. At this point i am willing to even email the CEO of he company but Aer Lingus is careful not to provide that information. Aer Lingus is a company that simply don't care about its customers and will treat with utmost disregard to every single customer asking for their assistance.	0
One of the worst airlines I've experienced. First, the customer service does not exist, I've tried to call for four days, waiting for over three hours before giving up, so I had to drive to the airport to ask a few simple questions! Chat was not available. Then on our flight back from Dublin, instead of extra leg room sits in the first row, 8a and 8c, that I paid separately over $400, we were assigned a second row, 9a and 9c and when before boarding I asked why, they told me that it's ok and I'm still on the first row because the layout of the plane was reconfigured.  When we boarded the plane, they just said sorry and offer to move us to even worst seats, next to 3 month old baby. The final insult was when the guy came to us and offer some left over wine from the business class 30 minutes before landing. In my list of the worst airlines, Aer Lingus has the solid second place (after Spirit of course...)	0
Worst airline and horrible refund policy. I was to fly from Beijing Capital to Dubai, but they cancelled the flight. I applied for a refund and it’s been 4 months and I still have not received my refund.	0
I have tried to communicate with you very actively and it has not been possible. Very bad customer service! They misled me in a bad way, over selling my seat, they sat me further back and they did not refund my money. In addition, they charged me for my luggage as if I had only had the ticket where you sat me. Traveling alone with a 2-month-old baby I was forced to pay for everything they said and thinking that they would call me to pay for the error, wherever and whenever as your staff at SDQ instructed me. Not only have they not called me, but they don't even answer any of my attempts at communication. I would never recommend your services, I am going to be in charge of telling and making public with evidence this outrage to a client of your "premier club".	0
I purchased several airline tickets to fly with the family for vacation. I needed to make a change. And no it wasn't a last minute thing. I did with 2 months prior to departure. They have the worst customer service. First to get someone to answer your call as I tried several days and no one answers the phone good luck. Its like playing the lottery with them. And then after the 4th day ( my lucky day because they answered) after one hour of waiting. They can't make my change they said. And if I choose for them to make the change then I would incur additional fees of $900. Are you kidding me. They are obviously not making the money because of all the upset customers they have. That they are trying to make money with any fees they can implement. terrible. First and last time I fly with them.	0
I purchased a round trip, needed to come back sooner then anticipated they for some reason couldn’t switch the dates so I lost that money. Fine so then I booked a flight for three to come back home they took my money it went through it was taken out of my bank acct up until today which is May 22 and I still haven’t received it back. When I get to the airport with two minors Aeromexico tells me my reservations don’t exist, yet they grabbed my money and I got stuck in Guadalajara with two kids.  I will never fly with Aeromexico again. Nor will I recommend anyone to that airline. I’ve had problems with them since the flights were booked. I spent over $3500 dollars this April just with this airline. I was able to fly back after purchasing $1600 worth in tickets with another airline.	0
I called Customer Service to cancel My flight that was departing to Mexico City early next day. I explained that I won't be able to make the flight since that day at my office one of the employees was tested positive and I was in close contact with him. The agent had 0 customer service he was helpless and told me that I won’t get any refund or future credit and told me go write an email and explain them they will answer you in few days but I won’t help you. After I wrote the email explaining everything I received a Standard email response that I think it’s an Automatic response that they just to everyone without even bothering to read the circumstances stating that they won’t give any credits or refund and they hope to see me travel with them again.	0
Heraklion to Thessaloniki with Aegean Airlines. Awful experience, very rude crew and they charge extra for luggage while you only can have one luggage of 8 kilos without informing you about changes before the check in.	0
I was traveling to Bucharest, after checking in and going through the control area, I arrived at the gate that my flight was going to take place.  30 minutes before the flight, they announced that the boarding will start soon. Firstly, it was smooth no problems with anyone even though some people had more than 1 luggage, duty free bags. Towards the end of boarding and approximately 20 people were standing at the queue, a female came to check the last people's tickets to see what ticket they purchased. I have purchased the economy class ticket along with most of my fellows. That lady checked my ticket, and said only one bag is allowed in the plane looking at my other hand while I was holding an extra duty free bag with 2 bottle of spirit that I purchased. And she literally pointed that I had to shove into my bag 2 alcoholic spirits which it was really hard since my bag was smaller than the required size.  I did manage to storeboth in my bag which I was really glad about it. When I reached the ticket check, the same lady stopped me and said "OK did u manage to fit everything in your luggage'' I replied "yes thank you" and she goes "ok let's check the weight". It's this moment that you realize the obvious. Yes the luggage was more than 8kg but what you expect after she is the one that told me fit everything in your bag so you can board the aircraft. So I was really angry at that moment and that is why I started yelling. What was the outcome?! I did manage to fit the 2 alcoholic spirits in my bag I had only one bag That bag was more that 8 kg obviously since I had to fit everything She initially said nothing can be done and after a while she changed her mind and charged that bag with an extra 50 euros.	0
London Heathrow to Dublin. Aer Lingus is the flag carrier of Ireland. God help Ireland! I sent an email over a week ago with my Etihad booking reference, asking 2 simple questions and still no response from Aer Lingus. Q1. What is my carry on baggage allowance (I'm flying via a partner airline) and Dublin to London is my final leg with Aer Lingus? Q2. What do I have to do when transferring from a partner airline arriving at Terminal 1, then departing from Terminal 2? Do I need to collect my checked-in baggage at Terminal 1 and then recheck in for the Dublin to London flight? Simple questions. No response. What terrible customer service.	0
Flew from United States to Dublin fine. Their customer service is the worst, usually 60+ minute wait each time you call, sometimes they pick up and disconnect right away, start process all over again. If you're lucky they pick up in 40 minutes. My wife and I booked business class seats for our flight back. While in Ireland we contracted Covid three days before our departure. Immediately called the airline to explain the situation how we couldn't leave on our original date, we simply wanted to change our departure date to a later date. After again a 60 min. wait on hold for customer service we were told that not only did we have to pay $500 each ticket to move our departure date, our business class seats were not refundable, transferable, or eligible for voucher. Thousands of dollars straight to Aer Lingus without them showing any empathy, courtesy, or willing to help in anyway. Simply "its our policy" and if I wanted to speak to a supervisor one could get back to me "within 72 hours". During a global pandemic this airline is preying on people with no regard for their customers, just are completely fine stealing their money. So sick in another country, spending money on extended hotel stay, and losing thousands of dollars to Aer Lingus and they simply did nothing, nor cared.  Dealing with this airline or worse than having Covid itself.	0
On my flight today from Washington DC to Brussels, I was denied boarding the flight. Despite just a connection flight and less than a 2-hour layover in Dublin, they wanted me to have an Irish Transit Visa. I am a permanent resident of the United States and have a valid Schengen visa. Since I have an Afghan passport, so had to obtain a transit visa. While I was booking my tickets, I provided all my documents and details (passport, green card info, and visa) to the airline. They send me the link to Verifly to submit all the required documents for my trip, they never informed me about any transit visa requirement. The Aer Lingus representatives on the counter were rude and even didn't care to even provide any information. This caused me a considerable financial loss. I have continuously tried to connect to their customer service line, but couldn't succeed in being on hold for more than an hour. I will never book any tickets with this airline and would never recommend them to anyone.	0
I booked to go in to Seattle and out of San Diego business class in June 2022. They sent a simple email saying the Dublin Seattle leg was cancelled. Then begins a bizarre sequence of attempts to try and work out exactly what I was going to do. Is the San Diego Manchester leg still active? Do I get a reasonable refund? Try and call, no business priority line despite paying for business, just a line with no indication of how long you will be on hold at 9p a minute. They recommend you use messenger. They answer once a day. How can I have a sensible conversation like that to resolve my concerns. I also travelled to Chicago from Manchester. There was no business class Manchester to Dublin so you are treated as an economy passenger. All fine once you get to Dublin but is poor before that. Overall there is no way to get hold of a person and have a sensible conversation, if it works it’s fine but if it goes wrong customer service is appalling.	0
Guangzhou to Vancouver via Beijing booked for mid-April. The worst airline I have ever seen. Air China doesnt care their customers and just want to get money from their customers. Refund policy is ridiculous and try to cheat customers. When you call customer service, the only thing they said is there is nothing I can do. Will 100% not to choose this airline ever again	0
Paris to Shanghai via Moscow. Our flight was 2hours delayed in Paris, therefore, we couldn't have the transfer in Moscow. They offer us to stay one night in the Novotel, nearby the airport. A driver were supposed to come at 10pm to pick us up. He came at the end at 11:35pm (the hotel was 5 minutes away from the airport). The staff was so incompetent and unpleasant. There were rude to us, they did not tell a word about anything, they did not communicate at all. Every time we had a request, they answered "wait a moment". We wait til midnight, once at the Novotel Hotel, and it was a joke. They took us through the garbage local and then we had to queue because the scanned our passport before getting into our rooms. They knocked in our doors the all night and wake us up at 5am calling on the phone and knock our doors. No customer service at all, they were horrible.	0
This is by far the worst airline I have ever flown on. Horrible customer service. I do not know how this airline is in business. Just try and call them, even their phones contacts can't help you and have hang up on you no matter how nice you are trying to be. Try sending them an email using the email on their website - it doesn't work! Warning - do not miss your connecting flight! Had to re-purchase my connecting flight from Mexico City to Mazatan which cancelled all my tickets for my return flight home 2 days later. Please read all the other reviews before using this airline. Please do yourself a favor and choose another airline!	0
There was one flight out of Utila on CMAirlines and one flight out of Honduras on Aeromexico. I had an hour before my flight and they refused to board me. They wasted an hour when they could have just put me through security and gotten me to the gate on time. The woman at the Aeromexico desk said "I'm sorry this desk is closed" and walked away without even trying to book me onto the next flight. I ended up booking a flight on United and lost the $1000 I spent on my Aeromexico flight. Aeromexico is the worst airline I've ever had to deal with and I will never fly with them again. I've tried calling their customer service lines and I have never once reached a human. Don't ever fly on Aeromexico.	0
Just to start off, they're customer service is you calling a phone number that no one answers. Now to the actual flight, they made me miss my layover they basically told me to buy a ticket for twice as much or to not take my luggage. The supervisor wouldn't even listen, and told me to go straight to buy another ticket. Another couple had the same issue, but they booked through another airline, and were able to not only get not only a reschedule but also their hotel room for the night. I went to another airline, and they gave me better options and very quick help, and it only took them 5 minutes. My only regret is having to wait for more than two hours for Aeromexico's customer service and not getting a flight the same day with the other airline.	0
My honeymoon was cancelled due to Covid. The booking company refunded me the hotel but not the airfare, they told me to deal directly with Aeromexico in order to get a voucher (not a refund). I accept that I cannot get a refund, its their policy, but give me an extension to utilize my paid fare. I am very upset because I've been tirelessly trying to speak to an Aeromexico agent to book my new travel plans and it is virtually impossible to get through. Originally I was given one ticket number, apparently I need two ticket numbers for the two plane tickets originally purchased, the agent I spoke to yesterday did not want to bother to search for them under my name and so after a 46 minute hold had to hang up the phone and call back later. Today I got through someone on the live chat and was charging me an additional $533.94 on top of my $910.84 paid value, when I responded a minute and a half later, the chat was closed. They wanted to charge me $1,444.78 for regular cabin plane tickets for a trip 6 months from now. I do not know where else to go and take care of this injustice.	0
Aeromexico is an extremely dishonest airline. They will do absolutely anything to keep your money and refuse any rebookings or recourse. Today we were refused entry to a flight despite showing the new COVID measures to enter Colombia do not require a COVID test. Despite that we were refused entry and the employee refused to rebook us furthermore no one ever answers the customer service, even after a 2 hour wait. Calling back and accessing option 4 for the Premium ticket holder (which we were) simply disconnects the line. Attempting to rebook online requires a 13-digit ticket number. The tickets issued by Aeromexico are only 12 digits. If you put an extra digit on the end, you will be told that your ticket cannot be changed and to call the customer service. Aeromexico are beyond a terrible airline.	0
I cannot speak for the flight itself but for the boarding experience at Malpensa Airport. Boarding staff were verbally aggressive towards me. I hadn't the PLF form to fly to Greece but managed to submit it while waiting fellow passengers boarding, the flight was due to arrive at 9 pm and I would receive the PLF at 0 am the next day so I could easily waited that time at Athens airport to present it to authorities, still the boarding gate lady, which spoke fluent Portuguese and was Portuguese, refused me boarding.	0
The A320neo has 31 rows of seats which means the legroom is very tight. During e-check in they allocate you seat which you cannot change unless you pay at least €5. Inflight service was poor with a bag which contained a sandwich, a snack and a bottle of water. They do not serve alcohol due to covid-19. Announcements were on English and Greek.	0
I had two calls with them on the 23rd and the 24th of July with regards to changing my flight. According to them, I could have one change without penalty with no extra charge due to Covid-19. However, because I needed to change airports, I had to pay the penalty. Whilst on my first call, the girl I talked to told me that I needed to pay 100euros for the change whereas the next day I was told to pay 140euros for the same change (Note: The flight rate didn't change at all). Despite the difference, I changed my flight ticket asking for a baggage too. They booked my ticket without adding a baggage! I called yesterday to ask what happened and they were telling me that there was no charge for the baggage. Then, they told me they would listen to my recording and call me back. They called me two hours later the phone was ringing for 5 secs and I did not manage to pick it up. I called back and I was told that the girl who was assisting me finished her work for the day. The next person told me that would look into it but instead of putting me on hold, they hung up on me and never called back! I called again today, the assistant could not find the notes of the first person who listened to the recording and of course did not add my baggage for free. I did however requested both calls (the one asking for 100euros and the second one when they asked for more money and did not add my baggage) I am waiting for the response. On the 2nd of August, I flew from Athens to Heraklion. There was about a 2-hour delay and the airline offered us a free ticket. However, they state that I cannot use the free ticket during Christmas, Easter, July and August but as I live in the UK and I am not allowed to use it the only periods that I can travel to Greece. Due to Covid-19 they do not allow a backpack and a cabin bag on board. They do not allow to check-in the cabin bag. The price tickets are not cheaper either.	0
Flying from Rhodes to Larnaca with my family during the Covid-19 pandemic with Aegean Airlines was not a nice experience. The passengers behind us kept taking their masks off and talking, and despite our numerous attempt to ask the staff to ask the passengers to keep their masks on they took it off. Even a steward talked to them for 15 minutes while it was off and still they did not care. We ended up having to keep it on for everyones safety and they just said relax.	0
New York to Beijing. Air China cannot be trusted as a 1st World Airline. I purchased a refundable airline ticket and had issues with my connection to the Air China flight. My entire family was going to the Far East for my daughter's graduation. Our connecting aircraft was cancelled due to a maintenance issue and we missed our flights. When I tried to re-book the next day, I could not reach anyone in their US office. They were closed. Seriously! I had to call their China number to try and get service. I was told that I had to re-purchase the tickets. My ticket was refundable and so I simply cancelled it given I could not re-schedule my family's flights. I am still waiting on that refund. I have sent approximately 15 e-mails to Air China. I did receive one response that advised me that I had to go to their website and formally cancel my flight which I did on the phone with their service agents. I tried that several times but their site didn't work. My advice to anyone traveling to China, do not use Air China. They are not a professional airline and their service is the absolute worst that I have experienced in 30 years of travel. Fly any other airline but do not subject yourself to this company.	0
Montreal to Beijing. Worst airline company, this is the only Chinese airline which refused to provide full refund for tickets cancelled before Jan 28. The government set up policies about refunding but this firm is just playing word games.	0
Male to Moscow. Really disappointed with the whole return flight from Male - it is a long flight, plane OK, but the crew very rude - it was a big disappointment, the way they treated passengers, snappy answers, etc. Flight was delayed by almost two hours, but no proper apology, etc. I find it also very strange that the drinks are served half an hour before the meal, by the time your meal arrives, you have none left, then you wait about another half an hour to get a coffee? I think this should be seriously re-thought, it is the same way on all long haul Aeroflot flights. The biggest issue however was at arrival when two of our suitcases came totally damaged, we have reported this at the airport immediately, were advised to log the given report via Aeroflot website within 7 days, now we received answer - very rude, lots of exclamation marks, asking for whole set of documents, new statement from us? for what - the report was done at the airport, copy of the passport, etc. Any airline can have a nice plane, but they can make a difference when something goes wrong and in customer service, apparently still long way to go with Aeroflot.	0
So, we booked flights with them leaving April 16 2020 leaving Cleveland OH to Cozumel MX for 7 people. Dur to Covid 19 shut down we were in lock down and flights were cancelled. We called and was told our tickets would be extended for a year. I would have to book by April 30, 2021 and fly by Nov 30, 2021. I have been trying to get these tickets rebook for a couple of weeks. Yesterday I was transfer or put on hold five times and each time the calls were dropped and long wait times. What I did find out is they have no flight from Cleveland nor are they flying into Cozumel. They are only flying from Pittsburgh or Buffalo to Cancun MX. What this means is we now have to drive to Pittsburgh or Buffalo then when we arrive in Cancun, we have to hire a van to transport us 1 hour to Playa del Carmen then again pay for a 1-hour ferry ride to Cozumel. Then repeat the process to get back. To top it off while we paid $431.33 for the original ticket. Now that they are not offering the flight we paid for and we have to jump though hoops to get to our destination Areomexico in partnership with Delta Airlines are changing us an additional $953.40.  I had to book flights for two more people. That done I get the email with the ticket in Spanish that I cant read and they never sent the ticket for the 7 that we had to change. I was on the line this time for 3 hours and 38 minutes!	0
The flight in general was great, the problem was with the luggage handling, one of our suitcases was severely damaged when we arrived in Puerto Vallarta, we contacted customer support to get help and a solution to replace or fix our suitcase, I contacted them almost daily to try and resolve the issue as I had no suitcase for my flight back due to their mishandling of the luggage, and the only response I got was "someone will contact you in the coming days". This never happened, no one ever contacted me and no one even tried to fix my problem. In the end, I had to get my bag wrapped with plastic and call it a day! Their lack of support or customer service is very disappointing, I used to recommend Aeromexico as a good airline, now I would say, be careful and pray that you don't run into any issues, otherwise you will never get a solution to your problem, such a shame that they do not help themselves by helping their customers, this is something caused by them with no accountability whatsoever.	0
I had confirmed a return date but the airline changed it saying I wanted that date. I spent half my vacation trying to change it back but the airline kept hanging up on me and then blocked my calls. I had to buy a second ticket to go home including one for my son who is 1 yr old but they charged his ticket as an adult. No one at the offices or even the airport could help me with the mistake. They all said I had to call their call center which screened my calls. I finally got an answer by email saying they would call back and im still waiting on that call. Plus the staff is rude. They don't even say excuse me when they pass by. They only offered what looked like a flat day old sandwich and that was on the return flight. On the first flight they only offered peanuts and they couldn't even offer milk for my son.	0
Heraklion to Thessaloniki. They said that because of covid-19 we could only bring one item on board. People had to measure their luggage size and to pay 40 euros extra, while there was plenty of space on board. At the same time there were really no airport covid19 tests taking place.  Also my seat was small for 75 mins flight.	0
Absolutely a trash experience coming from Dublin to Chicago. We ended up waiting on the plane for other passengers to board when it was way past our expected take-off time by over an hour. We were not compensated for this lost hour in any way at all. People who can’t show up on time need to be left behind in order to keep the responsible people on schedule. Absolutely horrible experience and I’ll always be telling people about it and how awful it was. My time is valuable and I didn’t appreciate how inconsiderate Aer Lingus was regarding it.	0
Bangkok to London via Bejing. The website doesn't work properly so you are not allowed to checkin online. Rude staff that doesn't speak English. Plane really uncomfortable and unclean. Don't change flight in China because you will find yourself lost with staff unable to speak English and very rude. Also they laugh on your face when you try to ask questions in English. I will never recommend this airline.	0
London to Manila via Beijing. I went to Manila via Air China and had a connecting flight to Beijing. Upon arrival in Manila, my luggage is not there. I had to fill up a form indicating that my luggage is missing, etc. The following day I received a reference and after that no one even bother to call me or update me about my missing baggage after that. It’s been 6 days already and still I dont receive anything from them. Even their customer service is not helping saying that they dont have contacts to Beijing or Heathrow and all they can do is wait. If only I can go and find it myself in Heathrow, Beijing or Manila airport, I will find it myself.	0
Moscow to Paris. A week prior to my flight the company changed the rules for carry-on luggage dimensions allowed on board so that my SwissGear luggage small case (promoted as meeting any airline carry on luggage requirements) that I had with me was no longer meeting their requirements for 1 centimeter! And they asked me to pay 100 euros to have it checked in. I have never had any problems with any airline that checked this case in as a carry on even with low-cost like WestJet. Avoid this airline if you don't want to feel frustrated. Worst experience ever.	0
We would fly from Amsterdam to San Jose (Costa Rica) on July 15, 2020. This was booked on January 19, 2020 at with airline Aeromexico. The flight has been canceled due to Covid. It is now March 2021 and I can report that I have not yet got my money back and I do have vouchers (of 75% of the €3300 that I paid) but that I may also book me another €150 per ticket 'service fees' costs. I think Aeromexico are downright scammers, it really is a shame that they are members of Skyteam. A few facts: - I paid €3300 for tickets, which were converted into a credit in Russian Rubles without my knowledge so that they are now only worth €2600. Aeromexico filed for bankruptcy (Chapter 11) in July 2020, so they do not have to refund people who booked before that time. They don't refund money, to any one. You will automatically receive vouchers, but you have to pay a service fee if you subsequently want to book a ticket. I have vouchers for 4 people, which cannot be exchanged for 1 person. You must therefore go on holiday with a group that you would go with 1.5 years ago. Downright scammers!	0
We were denied boarding because we were one of the last ones to stand up. There was a long line of people waiting to board and the supervisor refused to let us board.  When we were on time and was a big line.  Do yourself a favor and don't use this airline.	0
Never use this airline - avoid at all costs. We flew in from Cancun and during our layover our flight got canceled to the states due to weather. Upon returning to the airport for our new flight, we had all of our documents checked by workers twice at the gate before boarding started. Then five minutes before boarding began an employee came to us and told us we were missing a customs paper. I had to run back to Immigration, file for a new paper, pay 600 pesos and then go through customs again to get back to my flight. When we finally got to the gate, they asked for our boarding passes and then turned us away. The lady at the desk said "you were one minute late" and shut the door. I was begging them to please let us in, when another gentleman walked up, showed his boarding pass and was welcomed on. We were not. We had to buy new tickets for $774 USD to get on the next flight home. No one would help us, all of the employees were rude or lied straight to our faces. I will never fly with this company again.	0
Aegean canceled our flight on 30th March because it stopped all flights to Athens from 26th March onwards. They refused to refund us because our tickets were not refundable. We filed a complaint asking for a refund since it was the Airline that canceled the flight and not us. They offered a credit voucher that can be used within the next 18 months.	0
Heraklion to Athens. I finally found a flight to get home to the UK during the Corona virus crisis, flying Aegean to Athens and then Swiss Air to the UK via Zurich. It was a difficult time and travelling was quite stressful given the situation. We travelled with hand luggage to avoid baggage claim. When my wife and I came to board in Heraklion the ground staff,  weighed our bags and asked for a credit card and charged us 80 euros for excess baggage. We would have expected more compassion. Swiss offered to put the bags in the hold for not cost and could not have been more sympathetic and accommodating during the crisis.	0
London to Athens. Aegean is anything but an airline! They simply should not exist! Business Class ticket and from London to Athens, the back of my seat was destroyed. While in Athens, they cancel the flight and then they ask me to pay more to rebook my flight! When I ask the agent to transfer the call to a supervisor, his response was “it is the airline’s policy not to allow the passenger to speak with supervisors”! Simply unacceptable! There is absolutely no reason for companies like this one to exist!	0
I booked a flight from Athens to Thessaloniki return. They cancelled the flights and never gave back the refund of the amount and they suggested either rebooking (with the fare difference paid by me) or a credit voucher with limitations, valid for 12 months. I said to them I want a full refund of my ticket and I disagree with these 2 options as I am not obliged to fly with them next time. They said that their regulations changed because of COVID-19 and they don't refund. I feel like someone stole my money. I still wait for a refund because they violated the rules of the ticket issued. For sure, the airline's policy shows how they threat passengers both aboard and on the ground in any situation.	0
I wanted to go to Ireland to shoot woodcocks. I brought my shotgun with all the related paper work: European firearm pass and Irish certificate. It was all validated at Paris CDG by the Aer Lingus team. And then they simply forgot to put my shotgun in the plane to Dublin. And even worse, they seem to have lost it. It has been more than 10 days now and they cannot find my shotgun. And the worst is they don't really seem to care. Their call centre has a terrible connexion, and the operators keep on saying they are sorry but they are unable to locate the firearm which is under their responsibility. I will never ever fly Aer Lingus again.	0
Came to Chicago O'Hare with a negative PCR test to fly back home to the Netherlands and declined, apparently University of Chicago is not acceptable? They could only refer me to do another test at the airport (20 minutes away) for  240 dollars! In the end we agreed on a rescheduled flight for September, but up till today I am still waiting for my new ticket. Luckily the KLM check-in desk was next to Aer lingus so I was still able to fly a day later without any problems. Many emails have been send in which a generic response and as of today I have finally received an email.	0
I booked my flights home for Christmas four months in advance to minimise the costs. Aer Lingus have informed me that they have taken the liberty of changing the times of both flights by more than 12 hours. I can now no longer take one of the flights, as I had booked for 10pm because I have a job, and they moved the flight to 9am the same day. There were multiple other flights the same day they could have moved it to, that were closer in time to the original flight. Because of their seemingly random choice, my options were either rebooking onto another flight and paying the difference (around £300) or cancelling the original flight and rebooking onto another airline (£230). Surely if you cancel the original booking, the passenger should either have a choice of when to rebook, or you should move them to the nearest flight.	0
This company has offered daily tickets to different destinations all over Europe at affordable prices during, and after, the COVID 19 pandemic restrictions.  Their strategy was to cancel those flights right before the 14 days period that the EU 261/2001 law stipulates. They would, after, offer you 3 options: full refund, Flight reallocation or voucher from company. I chose to get a full refund and, well, turns out that Aer Lingus Customer Services are one of the worst I have dealt with. I created an application form for the total refund of my flight tickets, which was never replied to. I have tried to call them several times with no answer. I have written several emails with no reply. And after all, they kept sending me emails re allocating my flight (the one that suppose to be cancelled for at least 14 days). Nowadays I am still trying to get to them, but no response. This seems to be the way they have been operating lately. I will not fly with this airline ever again.	0
Sydney to Beijing. This has to be the worst airline in the world! After herding us (pensioners) into a huddle at Sydney airport they left us like that for 6 hours and then tell us the plane is technical and go get a hotel and come back tomorrow (after 2 weeks they gave us AUD200 each). when we did they had cancelled us out of all our flights to Portugal and we had to get Flight Center to re-book us, they hadn't even booked us on the new flight. The staff couldn't give a monkeys about its pax and treated us like animals and were so arrogant. The queue even had a fight as people were so tense and the police were called.	0
Sydney to Moscow via Beijing. The worst airline of all time! Website and App are horrible, making online check in not possible. For example, on app, you cannot check in if you do not have a Chinese phone number. When you enter a code of a different country, it defaults back to Chinese. For long flights it is so crucial to be able to select a seat before all the good ones are taken. After 2 hours of trying and multiple customer care calls which brought zero result, I have last row middle seats on both of my flights (24+ hours journey time). Unbelievable! Customer care is useless as well: they cannot do anything about not working online check in and are not even able to tell at what time airport check in closes. This is the very least they should be able to advise. On the flight there is very little leg room (even for me with 165 cm highly), the wine they serve is of very poor quality, the meals are rather small. I will never fly with them again!	0
London to Beijing. Rubbish airline, they changed flights 5-6 times and the final change the day before departure. Unable to make change, so they cancel whole booking. They shift the responsibility to the booking agent despite the booking being with them and them making the change.	0
Amsterdam to Moscow. Overall, the inflight experience is OK, but nothing special. However the airline is terribly overpriced. The cheapest option you will find for Amsterdam to Moscow is at least €300. There are no other airlines flying this route without stop. It surprises me to see this airline, selling tickets from Amsterdam to Shanghai from just €350, but Amsterda to Moscow from €300. Note, that Amsterdam-Moscow is just a continental European, 3 hour flight with no onboard entertainment or anything special. KLM flies the same route charging the same prices. Now, I am flying monthly to Moscow, but not anymore from Amsterdam, but from Brussels, as it saves €100 per flight. I am strongly considering to fly with a layover in Riga from now on. Despite being an Aeroflot bonus member, and taking 23 flights last year, I have never been upgraded to anything, and never been recognised as a customer. On the contrary, when I had to change my plane tickets because of making a mistake with the dates (I contacted them within 1 hour after booking and went to the office within 2 hours after booking), they insisted that I had to pay, despite other airlines who change it for free within a reasonable timeframe. It was cheaper to apply for a new Russian visa with different dates, rather than to change the flight dates.	0
Venice to Guangzhou via Moscow. I arrived only with my backpack with a couple snacks and a laptop. The flight from Italy to Moscow was delayed and I lost the connection to Guangzhou, rapidly I got switched to another flight to Beijing and then Guangzhou, being assured that I would get my luggage too in Guangzhou. I knew that when you switch to a local flight in China you must get your luggage at the entry airport so I asked the gate crew and have been assured again that in this case they would take care of the transfer. Arrived in Guanghzou, of course my bag was not there. The Beijing-Guanghzhou flight was operated by China Southern, where I left immediately a report (PIR) then waited, calling twice a day Southern, Aeroflot and finally Beijing airport before knowing after almost a week that my baggage was waiting for me at the Beijing customs and they could not release it because it would need my authorization. No one from Aeroflot and China Southern ever informed me about this or gave me a clue that they even were aware of. Finally, I got my authorization delivered and my bag collected by a colleague in Beijing. Meanwhile, from Aeroflot and China Southern, I was still hearing that my luggage was in the follow up search.	0
On November 1, Aeromexico cancelled my flight to Santiago, which I booked through my travel agent, Chase. I requested a refund three times from Chase. Chase told me that due to the pandemic, Aeromexico inhibited Chase's ability to issue direct refunds to passengers, and Aeromexico's policy is to only offer travel credit even for flights that they cancel. Three and a half months after the cancellation, I still don't have my refund. Aeromexico is brazenly violating American law.	0
They oversell tickets then leave people on purpose at the waiting room to board. The last place this can happen to you is in Ciudad De Mexico. They were asking people to stay and will give them $300 well no one wanted to stay so they board the passengers that overpay for the ticket and told the rest that the plane was close already. Force me to exit the airport to go change my fly outside and outside they play games and they force me to purchase another itinerary for $1,500.00 when my original ticket was round trip from Los Angeles to Guatemala for $550.00 I had no choice unless i wanted to stay at the airport in DF.	0
I gave this rating due to my awful experience returning from Mexico City to Tijuana. I arrived at the gate for my flight AM0170 at 6.13 am on Feb 6th, 2021. The flight was scheduled for a 6.35 departure. As I ran towards the gate one of the two attendants at the desk immediately left and closed the glass door behind him. When I presented the remaining attendant with my boarding pass he scornfully informed me that I was too late to board. There was still 23 minutes before departure. I pleaded with the gentleman to let me board, but it seemed to me he derived pleasure in my denial as he informed me "You're two minutes late." On my boarding pass, which I still have it clearly states boarding is at 6.00 am. It seems unreasonable to allow less than 13 minutes to board. I was forced to buy another ticket at a much higher price without a single concession offered. I have never felt so mistreated doing business anywhere. I cannot in good conscience recommend Aeromexico to a colleague or friend and would in fact discourage anyone from doing business with Aeromexico.	0
In brief, they cancelled my flight and then gave me the run-around when I tried to get a refund. In July of 2020 I bought a round-trip ticket London-Cancun for a friend for travel in August. Three days later they cancelled their London-Mexico City flights for the entire month of August. I called to find an alternative, but they couldn't offer me anything, save for travel credit. When I said I wanted a refund, the agent said I'd have to write to a dedicated email address. The email was returned as undeliverable, so I opened a dispute through my credit card, figuring I'd get my money back that way. AeroMexico objected to the dispute, saying my fare was non-refundable they said I had credit to use within a year, minus a $200 no-show fee. A no-show fee for a cancelled flight. When I finally fixed the problem with their email address, they said that since I bought the ticket through a third party vendor (in this case Orbitz) I'd have to get the refund through them. Orbitz was helpful, but said they still had to go through AeroMexico for their approval before issuing a refund. Months went by, and all Orbitz could say was that the airlines are very slow these days and AeroMexico was not responding. So they have the manpower to object to my credit card dispute and keep my money, just not the manpower to approve my refund. I wrote to them several times about this discrepancy, but they never addressed that issue, just repeating I'd have to go through Orbitz. Let me add, I tried to be understanding. I can see that the airlines are strapped. I said I would accept credit in place of a refund if I could change the name of the passenger (which the rules disallow remember I got this for a friend) and if the credit were not time restricted (which, so far as I can see, just helps them out even more). They said they could not do that because their policies do not allow it. Of course, their policies are under their control. They could change their policy if they wanted to, or just make an exception.	0
This airline is a joke do not fly them unless you really need to be somewhere and there's no other option. I had to book a flight to see my mother before she died then I had to change my ticket for obvious reasons and they didn't care about the reason they still just wanted my money. They wanted me to pay a change fee that was as expensive as a new flight they put always profit before people. I ended up buying another ticket from them because that was the next available flight. This is really the worse service by far I have ever received from an airline and there are many really bad ones out there. Many airlines would have compassionate waivers in cases like mine but they don't care. Do yourself a favour and never book a flight with Aeromexico!	0
I bought and paid flex ticket Zurich to Corfu for late April, they cancelled the flight, no reimbursement, you have to phone to Athens but you never get through! No possibility by email, chat or online. They write that there are long waiting times for telephone connection but they don't solve this problem.	0
Athens to Zurich. A320 neo, space between the seats in economy class is a no-go. Never encountered such an uncomfortable flight. A320s don’t get much denser than that and that is what my knees felt. They also put in place reclining seats, so this nightmare even gets worse if the person in front reclines.	0
Last March I booked above flights to Dublin and then received an email to inform me that the flight was cancelled due to Covid. Further informed that no refund was available but a voucher would be issued in next 6-9 months. I then booked a second flight the following week to same destination and again, received an email shortly thereafter informing that this flight was also cancelled due to Covid. And again the same process of no refund, voucher months later applied. It smelt like a scam to me so I retried to book my original flight - dates, times etc.. and would you believe, the original flight that Aer Lingus had cancelled on me was still available to be booked on their website. So they were selling tickets on a flight that they had already cancelled. Only recently I did receive a refund of approximately half what I paid for the flights. They said it was fees that made up the difference. What a disgrace of an airline. Never again Aer Lingus.	0
While I have no problem with the fights themselves, I have a big problem with the way they have been dealing with the vouchers which they issued in lieu of cancelled flights. Our flights to and from Munich in March 2020 were cancelled because of Covid and I was given a voucher number immediately but I didn't get a pin code for the voucher until December 14th 2020 and in the meantime I had to pay for Aer Lingus flights in July 2020 because I didn't have access to the voucher. This year we again had flights to and from Munich and I did finally get to use the voucher, the outgoing flight was cancelled but the cost of this flight was not credited to the original voucher, so it seems that we've lost this money. Just yesterday I tried to add a 20Kg, bag for our return flight using the voucher and while it took the cost of this from the voucher it didn't book the bag, and I've spent 40 minutes waiting to talk to customer services, without success. The system is a complete and utter shambles.	0
They offered a steal of a deal during the pandemic. I knew I was gambling on most of the ticket fee, since it wasn't refundable, and I ended up having to cancel because hotels weren't open in Dublin at the time. They still owed me the $80 refund of the government fee. Aer Lingus claimed they had 'unprecedented volumes' and were overwhelmed. If they had half a brain they'd know that by offering all these flash sales during a pandemic they'd need to be able to handle cancellations and rebookings. I emailed them 3 times, no response. Six weeks later and no refund. Needless to say, I'll never give them any more of my money.	0
The flight was cancelled by Aer Lingus. Based on the Aer Lingus policy I am entitled to get a refund. Waiting for weeks now. No reaction at all. Apart from e-mails from "no reply" mail box. Impossible to contact Aer Lingus by phone (over 45 minutes waiting time).	0
Montreal to Bangkok via Beijing. Late (1 hour). Food not good. Staff not helpful and not friendly. Not able to get boarding pass electronically so had to wait 90 minutes in line at Bangkok. Had to wait in line another 90 mins to pass through various levels of security in Beijing. Staff yelled with a scary voice to buckle up when there was only a small wind blow and stopped movies at least 20 times per hour for the same reasons (very annoying) in a 13 hours flight.	0
Auckland to Beijing. Very poor customer service. My husband and I were not seated together for a 13 hour flight. When asked if we could be seated together we were refused. I was also flying with a sprained knee and had asked for an isle seat. I was again refused and placed in a middle seat which made it really difficult to to stand up and get in and out. Staff were unwilling to help and really didn’t care	0
Tel Aviv to Moscow in economy class. I've flown with Aeroflot four times.  On the good side the fleet is new, boarding experience is OK.  In Aeroflot economy class for some reason the drinks come 30 min after food. The flight attendants remove dirty trays only after the drink service. So, first you sit for 30 min waiting for coffee for you desert and after another 30 min with dirty tray.  The food in economy has plastic taste to me, on flights I've flown there is no in-flight entertainment, no in-flight WiFi.  Sheremetyevo airport is small, difficult to navigate (try to get from the arrivals hall to the departures hall in terminal D), bad traffic.	0
There was no priority boarding as was included in my ticket. We were boarded last (apparently a covid 19 measure) however, there was a huge crowded line for boarding which completely defeats the purpose. Additionally, no social distancing measures were implemented. Our so called “dedicated” overhead compartment was given to anybody and everybody and our luggages were moved farther away from us, to make space for other people’s luggage. No point buying their premium tickets because the services are the same, in-fact due to the covid measures you are better of getting the cheapest tickets and you will board first. Overall, they give empty promises and 0 services. Its an airline that calls itself premium but offers basic budget services. Overall don’t get high hopes about their quality.	0
They only provide instructions in Spanish. My husband and I were separated for a random security check. They don’t announce that it’s time to board. They also don’t put the flights they are boarding on the screen in front of the gate. We needed up paying an extra $700 because of their complete lack or organization when it comes to boarding.	0
My granddaughter was getting married in Cancun Mexico in May, 2020. We needed to reschedule our flight for January due to the resort closed because of the pandemic. Now, in January we are not able to fly because of COVID and were not given any type of refund or credit. Will never book with Aeromexico again.	0
Terrible customer service. I was on hold for over 2 hours to pay for travels fee and they kept disconnecting me. I had to call over 5 times to talk to a representative but they kept transferring me.	0
It’s one of the worst experiences I had flying. The check in is a nightmare, to get to the plane you take a 30 min bus ride, the flight was delayed. Avoid this airline even if you pay more! It’s not worth it.	0
They cancelled a flight, I requested a voucher in Oct. 2020, and it is May 2021 and I am still waiting. I contacted them per email, and on Twitter, and I have yet to see my voucher. They have promised to issue it several times, but they just want to keep customers' money. So I am back to travelling with Ryanair, because although their service could improve a lot, at least they are honest and upfront about every single expense.	0
I was flying from Edinburgh to Dublin to Boston in 2020. The weather was bad, so after two scary attempts to land us in Boston, they landed us in a small airport in Hartford, CT instead. This is fine-being safe. Once there, they sent a representative to talk to us. They were going to bus us to Boston, MA, which would mean my connecting flight to Raleigh would be missed (I had booked this separately). I spoke to their representative numerous times. (Oh and they had lost one piece of my luggage too, which they were able to find a few days later). The plan from Aer Lingus was to bus us to Boston and we would arrive between 1 and 2 in the morning. We were told that the airport would then be closed, but we might be able to get a cab to a nearby hotel, but they were not sure if any were running. Their plan was to dump us outside of Boston Airport at 1 or 2 in the morning. Remember, this is after 2 extremely turbulent attempted landings and a diversion to a different airport. I asked if they could put us up in the Hartford Airport hotel instead. I was told yes and that I would be reimbursed, but the fastest way was to pay it myself and ask for reimbursement later. I also asked about having to rebook my connecting flight that was missed, and was told yes, it would be reimbursed. I was lucky enough to have enough to pay for an unexpected hotel and extra flight, but not everyone may have been so lucky. I filed a request for a reimbursement through Aer Lingus website as told to do. It took over a month for a response and was told that they could not help me because I showed them bank statements and no the original receipts. I got the original receipts and sent them in. I was denied at that point because "there responsibility was to get me to Boston, not to pay for connecting flights or hotels." So-even though I was told directly by their representative that I would be reimbursed, and that their plan was to drop us off at a wintry cold airport at 1 or 2 in the morning with no accommodations, they feel they held up their end of the deal. Ridiculous experience. They do not care about their customers. Pilot and flight attendants were great people though. Sorry the company is under par.	0
I had booked a flight with aer Lingus but then the travel ban came into place around Christmas time and I couldn’t travel. Aer Lingus refuses to refund me and when I’ve queried this, I get emails about how I agreed to the terms and conditions. Absolutely no help or hope of getting my money back even though there was a government travel ban. Ryanair  gave me a full refund for my flight going the opposite end way but Aer Lingus have left me high and dry and made it very clear that they don’t care about me or my custom. I don’t intend to fly with aer Lingus again	0
Booked Q4 2019 for flight in August 2020, Covid struck and Aer Lingus pushed people to take a Credit Voucher with time limits that were not fair. Credit Voucher took so long to arrive (Jan 2021) and customer services stalled with will expedite, in final processing for months and months. Eventually I gave up and contacted my Credit Card company and requested a 'Charge Back'. Luckily you have 120 days after the flight was meant to have occurred. I ended up getting a 100% Refund thanks to my Credit Card company. Be warned Aer Lingus - You have lost a customer for how you handled me and this event.	0
They just got away with my $897 without offering an option of alternative. I booked a ticket SEA-MPX-SEA in February 2020, with outbound date June 2020. Due to COVID I cancelled they trip and got, through Expedia, a credit. Credit will expire tomorrow. Airline is forcing to book between January and February (2021) since credit from original ticket was purchased on February 2020. However, no flights are available in between both months. Airline not willing to extend credit to purchase tickets beyond February 2021. Also, not willing to move expiration date of credit from 31/12/2020 (tomorrow).	0
Rome to Sydney via Beijing. Terrible experience with the unprofessional behaviour with my child who traveled as an unaccompanied minor. After being told our child would be looked after in the Beijing airport we discovered he was made to sit in an office on an office chair for hours on end with no assistance or food. We had booked a lounge and it was not offered. The level of supervision was atrocious. He was let out with an unknown passenger who offered food and water. We will never deal with this airline again. They continue to deny any lack of duty of care towards the child.	0
Shanghai to Singapore via Beijing with Air China. Ridiculous Airline. 1) Flight delayed. Technical issues. Lady at counter extremely unhelpful. I am risking my connection flight from Beijing. 2) My food options not updated so I will go hungry. 3) No checks for business vs economy class. 4) Made everyone wait for 40 minutes before opening boarding gates. Dont rely on the time they provide on the boarding pass. For 11.55 flight, they opened boarding gates at 10.50! 5. Unhygienic toilets. Not cleaned even after asking. 6) Soap missing from toilet.	0
Los Angeles to Tokyo via Beijing. First and foremost, the service received was incredibly poor.  As our flight date came closer, we began double checking our flight information before we realized our seats were not listed on our tickets. This was an issue as I purposely paid extra to choose seats so we could of course sit together. After hours of being on hold trying to reach customer service via phone, it ended up being a waste of time as the line just disconnects. We decided to deal with it in person as we could never get a hold of a customer service rep. via phone. But low and behold, after arriving to our terminal gate, our seats were mixed up and we were seated separately. The rest of the ride is downhill from here. Need I say more, do not take your chances and be persuaded by the ticket prices and flight times. Stay away from this airline and pay more for more popular airlines.	0
I purchased a ticket from Mexico City to London on August 2, 2020. On August 9th, Aeromexico cancelled the flight. They did not even offer to refund the money paid for the ticket, as they must do by law. Rather, the cancellation message said that we could have an open ticket to any destination.  To this date (December 23rd), Aeromexico has neither refunded the ticket price nor honored their offer for an open ticket. All I get when I call the airline are lies and more lies -- first, they said that the money had already been refunded, and then that I would get a voucher for 115% of the ticket price, but none of that is true. The airline's latest communication was to send us a notice informing us that our claim was subject to their bankruptcy proceeding in New York. Yet another lie - that proceeding does not affect any claim against the airline that was created after June 30, 2020. They'll probably also claim that the flight cancellation was caused by Covid, although they sold the ticket and cancelled the flight in August, well after they knew all about the pandemic's effect on air travel. (I suspect that their plan all along was to cancel the flight four weeks out and just keep the passengers' money.)	0
This is a complete joke of an airline. They disconnected on me 6 times for two days and issued me a voucher with the wrong date of birth that I cannot claim. Not only that, I have to prove to them that they caused the error to get the new voucher issued. I ended up disputing with credit card.	0
It’s the worst airline I’ve ever traveled with they did not transfer the luggage is from one aircraft to another one we had a stop in Mexico for my next flight. Their customer service is the worst I had to contact them because they lost my luggage and kept it with them for days the day I received my luggage they wanted me to go pick it up at the airport and I said no they had to deliver to my home. To my surprise when I open my luggage everything was missing in my luggage her luck they had open my luggage and stole a lot of stuff in there they left me empty-handed, and the airline doesn’t want to accommodate me  and they don’t want to look into it. So don’t travel in this airline because customer service will not be held responsible or they will not help you at all. I had trouble before and the only problem is I had hat is it they have a lot of delays and other little things like those that I don’t care about but they stole a lock for my luggage I don’t even know how they opened it.	0
6 months waiting for vouchers. Rang them multiple times but they keep telling me it's not their department.  They won't put me through to the correct dept. or give me contact details for them. Just keep putting me off.	0
Like many other complaints here - Aer Lingus is basically getting away with theft - for myself - I requested a voucher almost 9 months ago in Mar 2020 and nothing. Pretty sad and sickening to see them using COVID-19 as an excuse to keep people's hard earned cash. There are quite a few complaints where we are talking thousands of dollars/pounds/euros. I have also been reading from other complaints - that even when people get the voucher after waiting many months that the voucher is being denied.	0
Absolutely disgusted! Booked a few days away in Edinburgh a few months back as a birthday present for my partner. Had rang around 2 weeks before my flight date to cancel as both Belfast and Edinburgh had went into a further lockdown. The advisor told me even though I couldn't get a refund as the flight hadn't officially been cancelled, that he could move the flights to the same dates next year due to "exceptional circumstances" free of charge. He then advised me to wait until 24 hours before my flight to do this as there was a chance I could get my money back in the event that the flight was cancelled. This was not the case however and when I rang to get the dates changed I was told by another advisor that there would be an additional charge of £168.00 on top of the £150.00 I had already paid. When I disputed this and told him about the previous conversation he became quite blunt and rude and told me to wait until 2 hours before my 7am flight to see if they were going to cancel it if I wanted my refund? Not usually one to write reviews at all, but I have never been so appalled or angry in my entire life, I think in the middle of a global pandemic, where people are struggling enough as it is, for an airline to blatantly rob people is beyond a joke! Basically, the fact that there's a lockdown means nothing when it comes to travelling, even though some people can not afford to take a further 2 weeks isolation period off work. I have handed Aer Lingus £150.00 of my money for nothing and have been refused a refund even due to the circumstances or even the basic courtesy of a flight change 1 year in advance. I have never heard of anything this disgraceful happening with an airline and I certainly will not be travelling the thieves again, and will be advising others not to either.	0
I had a flight from Edinburgh to Belfast this evening (Oct 26th, 2020), I wore a pair of gloves since I have a skin issue, too much hand sanitizer directly to my skin will cause bad eczema. However, before I got off the plane, a crew member at the gate suddenly spoke to me: “just a suggestion, you don’t need to wear gloves just washing your hands more frequently will be fine!” This made me feel offended and been judged by her, first of all she doesn’t know the reason behind, secondly I’m not here to seek her opinion, she really should keep her very personal opinion to herself! This issue made me feel really uncomfortable!	0
Bangkok to Barcelona via Beijing. Absolutely atrocious and an experience never to be repeated. The quality and standard of service prior to travel was non existent. The quality of the plane and standard on in flight service was very poor. On arrival at Barcelona, I was informed that my Baggage was left in Beijing. 3+ days later my bag was delivered broken.  Total compensation 18 euros. My expenses for the 3 days were greater than 18 euros, and how they think I can replace the bag for 18 euros is beyond me. Never Again. There are plenty of far superior alternatives. Was it cheap? Yes - but cheap usually means cheap and nasty - which it most definitely was.	0
Flew Air Canada Rouge twice this week. Booked thinking I was flying Air Canada. Knew nothing about the “rouge” brand. Both flights were delayed. They did not have sufficient time between flights to properly move planes or service them. Both flights were delayed. So 100% chance of delay. Rude staff who will cut the customers needing extra time off. The flight attendants made a guest put two bags below their seat so they could accommodate one guest who wouldn’t find her own open bag spot. Very rude service. First flight, boarded an hour late then sat for an hour waiting to push back as they didn’t have weights to fly. No offer of drinks or anything.	0
Bucharest to Shanghai via Moscow, the first flight was canceled by them and postponed to 6 hours later, of course the connection with second flight was lost. The operator in Bucharest can not reschedule the flights. Arrived in Moscow at 23:30 I go through the transit area where I get a new ticket for next day at 9:20, and they send me to terminal F for accommodation but here they told me that no room for me because " are many delays and all available rooms are occupied, give me 2000 rubles (34euro) and told me that I can spent it in some restaurants. I just ask for a bed because need to stay in airport 9 hours over the night and fly other 8:30 hours to Shanghai. As is seems they are not ready for such a situation or they think that few money can make people to forget their mistakes. Next time forget this airline.	0
Vienna to Delhi via Moscow. One of the worst airlines I travelled. They can delay flight or cancel the flight without any information then they  leave u on your own, not provide any accomodation or food, no representative there to assist you.	0
This airline is totally unreliable. First of all, trying to book a flight on the website is usually impossible, and when you try purchasing your flight over the phone, somehow, the flight prices are higher, even if online there's a cheaper price for the exact same flight. Today I wasn't allowed to check in and board my flight because I arrived an hour before the flight departure. I understand it's a policy to arrive two hours earlier, but I have never been left out an hour before the flight. As soon as I arrived to the desk the woman kept saying no without looking at me, no to everything I asked, even if her answer didn't make sense. I asked her to please give me a phone number and she didn't know anything. After I found one online and called, the person on the phone didn't know anything and said he couldn't help me, he could only purchase another flight for me. The staff are ignorant to anything there is to know about their job. I have never been truly helped by them.	0
COVID policy is a pure lie. I asked for a change on family tickets because my daughter is sick. They have me waiting 1h45 and ask me to pay a price higher than the initial price when it is very clear that planes are empty. I asked to talk to a manager, she made me wait 15 minutes more, then terminated the call. Total lack of respect, avoid at any costs.	0
Couldn't regret more to have booked in this airline. First, you can't do anything online, you have to call and it will take forever for someone to answer your call. Second, they want to charge me to change a flight, when I can't even fly cause it's not allowed due to Covid and when I mention that, they want to tell me there's no restrictions (they basically don't have the information), but luckly I had searched before and after a long call they would notice I couldn't fly, but still don't help. Should mention that they almost have no flexibility for changes (they don't care for Covid). Followed by terrible communication, not helpful or nice at all and can't even understand English well. After all, when I have a new day for my trip I will have to call again and spend God knows how much time (this one was about one hour). Honestly, if you have any chances of not flying, do not go for Aeromexico!	0
We missed our connecting flight to Larnaca twice due to delays first of Lufthansa and then of Aegean. We ended up with a route of 4 flights from Hamburg to LCA with total trip duration of 24 hours. The ground staff of Aegean at the gate requested me to leave my carry-on baggage at the gate to be picked up at luggage claim at LCA as the plane was full. I kindly explained that I’m traveling with a companion who had his carryon with him and we had to get a taxi together immediately after arrival. The ground staff showed no consideration and insisted that it is the airlines regulation. She spoke rudely with a loud voice.	0
My flight was cancelled for some reason the airline didn’t even had the courtesy or system in place to notify the customers. I came to know when I tried to go through airport security as they couldn’t locate the flight. The airline company sent no email, text message or updated the information online so that customers are aware.  I was put on a flight 25 hours later. I missed my work and had to figure out my myself the place to stay in the interim. I had to pay out of my pocket for the stay. When I called customer service they refused to help. The online customer service refused to help or compensate for cancellation as well. Now I wonder why would anyone with sane mind ever use such irresponsible airline company.	0
After months of sending emails and requests I finally received an Aer Lingus voucher for a flight cancelled in May. It now transpires that I cannot even use this voucher to pay for an outstanding balance on changing flight dates with Aer Lingus. Customer service has been absolutely appalling throughout.	0
Bangkok to San Francisco via Shanghai. What a nightmare. Staff did not recognize my Star alliance status and told me to que with the rest of the chaotic crowd. Seats are tight and the food is less than mediocre. To make matters worse, you have to go through customs in Shanghai, even though you are transiting. Never again	0
One of the worst experiences of my life. Our first flight after the pandemic to visit family for Christmas. We purchased these tickets 4 months ahead for our family of 4 as Christmas presents, so we could all go and relax and enjoy family time. The night before our flight we could only check in my husband and myself, it was giving us a note that we needed to come see someone at the counter upon arriving to the airport. We went very early the next day, try to check in our daughters again and the same notice came up. So we went to find out what the issue was and a guy at customer service very rude and unpleasant, notify us like nothing that the two tickets for our daughters were sold out to their own staff. I could NOT understand what was happening at the same time and why would they do that to tickets that were already paid 4 months ahead of time. Anyways after arguing and actually crying we had to leave our two daughters behind waiting there to get accommodations for the next day on the evening. With the loss of two days of their flights and my agony as a mother we left them behind. Because they could not accommodate all of us on the same flights now because everything was sold out. We wrote to Air Canada a complaint and the excuse was because of the weather their flight was delay. Not knowing that we already knew that the tickets were re-sold to accommodate their own employees. I will never like to use their service again. That was cold, calculated, irresponsible and lack of respect and responsibility to their customers	0
Flying two adults and a toddler. Summary of my experience: 12 hours waiting at the airport getting messages every hour that my flight was delayed. Cancelled flight at 10 pm and Air Canada did not offer a hotel. No meals offered. Customer service did not answer the phone. No one available to discuss my issue.	0
Likely the worst airline experience I have had, outbound YYZ to PHX on Dec 15, 2022 Air Canada suggested that we arrive at YYZ at least 3 hours before AC 1721 for a 9:25 departure, so we staggered in at about 6:15. At 7:23 the flight was delayed until 9:20 We then boarded the plane and waited on the tarmac for about an hour. Then we were ordered off the plane and told to take everything with us. At 10:14 the flight was delayed until 12:30. Gate agent scolded passengers because someone had used the plane's lavatory while it was on the ground, and apparently that was the cause for the delay. As if it's the first time in the history of air travel that someone used the plane's toilet before it left the ground. At 10:30 the flight was delayed until 1:30 At 11:25 the flight was cancelled and we were re-booked on AC 1723. Our seats were separated by 14 rows. No refund for premium seat selection that was denied because of the cancellation At 2:26 there was a gate change At 4:17 there was another gate change At 5:21 that flight was delayed until 8:15 Wheels-up after 9 pm. We arrived at our destination about 12 hours late. Compensation offered? A $10 meal voucher. I have travelled all over the world, and dealt with scores of airlines and hundreds of airline personnel. I have never met with such rudeness and condescension as I have with Air Canada Rouge. Worst Airline Experience Ever	0
Moscow to Rome. I was not lucky because I had a huge man next to my seat 9D. His left arm and shoulder were pushing me constantly toward the other side of my seat I was very uncomfortable. I moved to one of the free seats of row 8 (exit door's row) were 4 of the 6 seats were free. A crew attendant came immediately and ordered me to move back to my assigned seat because all seats of row 8 were already taken. Lie, we were already flying for more than half hour! I explained the reason of my change and I asked for another seat. The only one available was in the last row where seats don't recline and are uncomfortable. I expressed my disappointment, but it didn't change their attitude, justifying it with Aeroflot policy. I also offered to pay for the change with no result.	0
Heathrow to Hanoi return via Moscow. When we were queuing to board the plane we were called to one side and told the flight had been overbooked and as we had the longest connection time in Moscow we had to wait until the flight the following morning. We were put in a nearby hotel and went back to Heathrow in the morning and got on the next flight. On Aeroflot flights there's minimal drinks on offer, water, orange juice, or wine out of a paper cup. The food is okay, and the seat comfort average. When we landed in Hanoi we found out our bags had not come on the flight with us but the staff did not know where they were, nor could they tell us how long they would take to reach us. This is a huge problem when you're travelling around Vietnam for a month and in two days would be 1000 miles away from Hanoi where the bags would be delivered. We were given a number to call to check on the status of our bags but every time we phoned we were not given any information. A week later we were told our bags had been found. We arranged for them to be sent to hoi an where we picked them up. Absolutely no compensation from the airline, not even an apology. On our return flight our flight was delayed by 5 hours which meant we missed our connection. This would have been okay if Aeroflot arranged a hotel for us until the next flight the following morning. But instead we had to fight our way (literally) through queues at Moscow airport with hundreds of other delayed Aeroflot passengers to get our connecting flight booked, which was a 7am flight the next day. We were then told another rep would arrange our accommodation at midnight, the time now was 9pm. By midnight there was no sign of any rep. Other frustrated passengers started demanding information from the staff that were around but it was no use. At 3am we gave up and went to the gate to wait for 4 hours. The gates were full of hundreds of passengers, including babies and children, on airbeds they were handing out of a room at the end of the terminal. We queued for a further hour to get an airbed. By 4am we were on an airbed and had a couple of hours lay down in the cold airport before our flight to Heathrow. We tried to get good value for our food vouchers and we're able to get a tea, croissant and egg It was a nightmare to fly with Aeroflot.	0
Atyrau-Almaty-Bangkok. Atyrau-Almaty flight cancelled without explanation on the day making us stay in Atyrau for additional 2 days without offering accommodation. Replacement flight delayed twice. After we an hour in a check-in queue we were told that they ran out of seats on the plane leaving us and about 20 other passengers stranded. Offered tickets on additional flight on the same day but it was late to get on the connecting flight in Almaty. After 4 hours told that the additional flight was delayed. At 11pm it was announced that the flight was cancelled so we attempted to rebook. Told the next available flight was in 2 days which was unacceptable and we bought tickets with another airline. The next day we flew to Almaty with another airline and got on our connecting flight to Bangkok. As a result of the issues with Air Astana flights we had to spend extra money on the flights in Kazakhstan and Thailand.	0
They canceled my flight from Cancun to Huatulco and therefore I had to buy two more tickets and a hotel night when I contacted them they told me that they canceled the flights due to Covid but that no refund would be given to me. Me cancelaron el vuelo de Cancún a Huatulco y por ende tuve que comprar dos boletos más y una noche de hotel cuando me comuniqué con ellos me dijeron que cancelaron los vuelos por Covid pero que no se me daría ningún rembolso	0
Our nightmare began April 17, 2020 when I attempted to purchase online flights to cancun MX. I completed the purchase of 2 tickets when a pop up box informed me the transaction had failed to try again. So, I did. The second time the transaction went through and I that moment I checked my email for a confirmation and found that I had in fact purchased 4 tickets in the same flight to Cancun. I immediately called the customer service line and spoke with Adrianna who assured me that they would refund the duplicate tickets. She issued 2 refundable tickets and said it would be 4 to 8 weeks before we would see the refund on our credit card. In the meantime, in walks COVID and our 2 other tickets are cancelled so I call and I am assured we have the option to fly for up to one year after our flight was cancelled. All good right? Not at all! No refund ever happened on the duplicate tickets and here we are in August. Our other tickets appear to be issued for June 2020 flights and no flights existed at that time that we were aware of. Our trip was medical in nature and needed priority but, no such luck. We ended flying on American thinking we’d book before our year was up to use the tickets. I don’t know what was done but there were no flights I could find on AeroMexico in June. We are desperately trying to get a refund on one set of tickets and flights that were promised on the other two. I’m afraid we’ve lost our money and what recourse do we have?	0
AeroMexico canceled my connecting flight from Mexico City to Cancun. I had to book another flight. And got no help from their costumer service. They answered only a few days after my flight was scheduled for departure. And they could do nothing for me which I find completely ridiculous. Not even a flight change proposition. I demand a voucher or a refund. This is not fair.	0
Horrible experience. Flights kept getting changed right before the trip. The worst part was when my return flight was changed and it overlapped with my connecting flight home. How does this even happen? How can I be on two planes at the same time? Thankfully I caught this error before going to the airport, but Aeromexico should have reached out to get this sorted. On top of this, the fight was rescheduled for the next day, causing me to have to take an additional day off from work at the last minute. Boarding of the plane was unorganized and frustrating. Despite me paying extra to sit in premium economy, I was forced to board the plane last! This didn't make sense to me and caused me to have to check in my carry on at the gate because there wasn't enough storage space in the cabin by the time I got on the plane. This was my second time flying with Aeromexico. The first time my luggage was lost at one of my connecting flights and I was without my items for one week. I decided to give them a second chance this time, but this is the last time I fly with this airline. International travel is stressful enough and I shouldn't have to deal with incompetence and disorganization on top of that.	0
I did not even get the chance to fly due to COVID-19. I completely understand the situation what angers me is the company's complete disregard for its clients, their lack of ethics, and their greediness. It is almost as if they were using the current horrible emergency to scam passengers. I was bound to fly on the 4th of July the flight got cancelled, but they only option they gave me was an open ticket to any route and any destination. They claim that they are waiving change fees, but that I will still have to pay the fare difference. The catch is that I was initially flying MEX-CDG-TLV and CDG-MEX if now I want to change to say round MEX-IAH, I still have to pay a difference between 100-300 USD! If you quote a round MEX-IAH on this same company on the same date, you can get it for around the same price as the difference. Do note this: I wanted to fly on july 4th to attend a particular event and I decided to spend some of my money on that. The airline is unable to provide with the service I required, so I want my money back. Instead they tell me that they cannot give me my money back, in fact, they are penalizing me because they were unable to provide the service. Avoid this horrible company at all costs. When things go well, they are just another average airline, but when things go wrong, they show their true colors. Unfortunately, this is not the first time I have such an experience with this airline. I give them 1/10 just because I cannot give them a negative score, but in my head they have around -3.5.	0
Booked flights from Birmingham to Dublin, Aer Lingus rescheduled the flights from Heathrow instead, a month on and they haven't tried to get in touch or respond to my request for refund. They're coasting along on government grants and ignoring their customers completely. Disgusting.	0
I applied for a voucher because my flight was cancelled due to corona-virus, I received an email to say they had received my voucher request on 23/03/20. I have made two phone calls to Aer lingus the first one said they would escalate my request. In my second call they said they had no record of my earlier (two weeks previous) escalation. I was given an escalation number and I asked if nearly four months of waiting is long enough, the person hung up on me after getting through and her putting me on hold took about forty five minutes.	0
Waiting since 24th March for voucher refund, after a lot off emails they said it was emailed to me approx end off May but I never received the voucher. Since then no response to my emails and customer service is a disgrace. My rating is based on customer service only.	0
I was forced to cancel my trip to Dublin due to the coronavirus. The Aer Lingus system would not allow me to cancel my reservation online. Because I had bid on an upgrade that had not yet been processed I wanted to make sure to cancel before that bid processed. after many hours over several days trying to get through to their reservations department I was charged the upgrade fee. To cancel my flight I resorted to an email. I have spent the last several months trying to get the upgrade fee returned to no avail. I would not recommend this airline. Their actions during a global pandemic indicate they care about nothing but making money.	0
Los Angeles to Shanghai via Beijing. The flight arrived late into Beijing and I missed the connecting flight to Los Angeles. They made everyone wait in an area for forty minutes, then put everyone in a bus that got lost twice and took ninety minutes to get to a hotel. No food was provided, my bathroom had no shower door and had a clogged sink. I was the only Caucasian amongst all Chinese. Not a word of English was spoken. When flying from Los Angeles to Shanghai five days earlier the same thing occurred. My flight from Shanghai to Beijing was cancelled due to weather and I was forced to spend the night in Beijing. Rather than accept their accommodation I took the money they offered, forty six dollars and found a four star hotel that cost $250. Air Canada had its passengers stay at the same, pricey but reasonable, hotel. The following day, after spending three hours on the tarmac, without any communication from the pilots, the flight finally departed for Shanghai. Returning from Shanghai I was wiser but no less lucky. My flight from Shanghai to Beijing showed that it would be delayed and I knew I would miss my connecting flight to Los Angeles. An hour prior to the flight leaving I informed the airline staff that I would miss my connecting flight and requested they instead arrange another one. I even showed them flight options on my phone. The answer was no answer. I had to take the flight or be left on my own in Shanghai, not knowing what would happen. I took the flight to Beijing and was then taken to the hotel. I kept asking myself, why can’t Air China run some very simple regression analysis to determine the chances of customers making flights given variables like seasonal weather patterns and historic flight delays. The only answer I could come up with was they either do not think it is important or do not know how to do it. Why do airports in China suffer some of the longest delays in the world? As mentioned in the Economist, “The first reason is that its airports err on the side of extreme safety.” This is consistent with state run ideology. Play it safe. No mistakes, and you won’t get in trouble. According the South China Morning Post, “Like the rest of the world, the biggest cause of delays according to CAAC is the weather, which accounted for 56 percent of flight delays ” No one thinks this excuse is legitimate.	0
Milan to Fukuoka via Beijing. Bad Service. I booked a kosher meal for the flight. The flight attendant didn't checked the special meals, trying to serve me same as others. When I asked for the special meal, she returned to the galley and brought me an open box though it was written on it in big letters that it must be open ONLY BY THE PERSON WHO REQUESTED THE MEAL. DO NOT EAT IF IT WAS OPEN BY SOMEONE ELSE. After I complained, the flight service manager briefly apologized for the "little" mistake, returned to the galley and after a while brought me a small plate with a piece of a fish and salad from the business class. He was in a good mood, laughing, and obviously not comprehending why I refuse to accept the food, saying repeatedly that it was much better than my kosher meal. As a result, I was left without food. How could such a person be a flight attender MANAGER? I have never felt such humiliation and ignorance of passenger needs. Shame on Air China for the service! In addition to being left without food for a 10 hours flight, I got my checked luggage (a hard suitcase) at the destination destroyed by 4 big cracks.	0
Horrible! Would never use this airline again! They lost the luggage of 30 passengers (including me). Said that unfortunately they forgot to board the luggage on the flight. I'm still waiting for my luggage 3 days later, with no clothes, no medicine (that I need to use daily) and no answers! Horrible customer service, horrible service! Never again!	0
Traveled Air Canada rouge from Bridgetown to Toronto and back to BGI. To YYZ was not bad as there was just a slight delay. On the way back to BGI the staff was not understanding as I was traveling with medication and the scales were off as I had to use 2 different scales that gave different weights and I had to move around items and was advised I would have to pay $100 cad for 1lb of overweight. The staff were rude and very nonchalant about it. I requested fragile stickers for my luggage my luggage was brand new and there were a few items in my luggage that could break. When I received my luggage a it was dented and a wheel was off. I'm quite appalled by the service received as ticket price were extremely expensive seeing the space given for seating and no entertainment, having to pay for wifi and even water.	0
Mexico City to Cancún. Don't fly with this airline . During COVID 19 emergency they are still flying at capacity ! Nonetheless, when asked to be moved or why they are keeping flights at capacity I was left alone with a response of this is what it is, you wanted to fly to Cancun and this is what we have. Just not worth it . Estoy extremadamente preocupada y además dolida con el gobierno Mexicano al no poner restricciones de medidas de salud básicas. Estamos en una época donde la seguridad va más allá de la economía. Los vuelos están a capacidad en espacios reducidos y además de pésimo servicio al cliente Recibido por las azafatas . No obstante la única medida de regulación es la temperatura . Da tristeza tener que pensar que esta aerolínea no se preocupa por la seguridad de sus pasajeros y más solo en la remuneración económica.	0
I had a trip to Cuba with Delta that was cancelled amid Covid. I requested my refund without any problem. However, when i tried to get my money back from a cancelled flight amid Covid, it was horrible. To begin, I would like to say it was very hard to get someone. I tried all the numbers, the chat, no emails, messenger with a robot. Days of trying and waiting. I want to clarify that I understand this time that we are living, but in my opinion this was extreme. After exhaustion I finally was able to chat with someone. I wanted to change my flight to September. They wanted to charge me like $80 more per ticket and we are four. Just to change what was cancelled. For every written response I had to wait 5 minutes. It was not fluid. If you like it or not that's it. Pay more or lose it. Refund is not an option. They refuse to give your money back. The guy was telling me it was not their fault. It's not one's fault. You just suppose to take care of your clients. Lesson learned, do not flight Aeromexico. Not one can be happy with their policy during this time that we are living. Plus if I don't want to lose my money, I have to reserve before January and travel before April. I can't believe what they are doing. Getting rich at the expense of the crisis we are living.	0
Worst customer service ever. Rude customer representatives. Never flew they emailed me & changed my flight & date then cancelled due to Covid 19. Will not offer refund they decided to keep customers money with hope of them using it in fortune but I will never use this airline in my life & I will let everyone know not to.	0
Athens to Munich. The ground staff in Athens is unpolite and rude, if the onboard bag is 1-2kg too heavy charging them 50€. Calling each passenger to their desk who didn't book any extra baggage. I'll never fly with this airline again. The food on board is really bad for me.	0
I took this airline from Rome to Athens on July 30th and my checked in baggage was damaged. One of the wheels was missing and my suitcase was cracked. I went to the desk where they were handling this situation. I reported it and emailed them the day of the incident. I didn’t receive an email back until the end of August. One of their associates informed me that they can compensate for the damage and give me €80. I gave them my banking information, they said over and over again that she still needed an “Intermediary SWIFT code” as it is necessary for non-EU people. I went to my bank Chase, and they had never heard of that, so I called the wire transfer department at Chase and they informed me that the recipient should have the Intermediary SWIFT code. I already gave them the information they needed so now it’s their turn to transfer the amount. I still haven’t received my compensation from the airline.	0
I had a flight leaving March 15th 2020. My flight left at 930pm. A travel ban went into effect at Midnight that same day, 2.5 hours after my flight was to leave. My tour was cancelled, hotels closed, and I could not travel, or I would of been quarantined either in Ireland upon arrival or United States upon returning. With no tour we had to cancel flight. I was in a group that was to appear in the St. Patricks day parade in Dublin, which was also cancelled due to Covid-19. Aer Lingus wanted us to rebook our flight, and fly there by the end of the year 2020. We have no vacation time left.  The tour company in Ireland refunded our fare. Aer Lingus wont, saying they will only refund our taxes. Horrible customer service. Unrealistic expectations to fly there this year with the virus spreading globally, including Ireland. All essential travel is on hold. How can anyone even realistically plan a  trip like that at this time.	0
I am thoroughly displeased with customer service. I filed for a full refund in March when the travel bans were established. If I did not get a full refund, I intended to take the voucher. However, Aer Lingus only refunded my taxes and fees without notifying me. They still have yet to notify me that they closed my case. I called back as soon as I noticed the partial amount in my account. The first representative was very helpful and offered to send an email requesting a full refund since I was not told my options. However, when I didn't hear back, I called again. The next representative was very rude. She kept interrupting me and told me it would be denied and that I was at fault. She said my case was closed and they are not returning my money even though the flight is cancel. My main issue is my account was closed without my consent and without being told my options. I would have never taken the taxes and fees over a full price voucher. Now I am being shut down because they closed my case. They also will not send me any documentation to send to my trip insurance. I still have not received an email telling me my account is closed and why I was only refunded taxes and fees. Now they have profited over $800 from me on a service they are no longer providing over a technicality and loop hole of a situation.	0
Dublin to Chicago. Irresponsible airline! My wife and I had a “bucket list” vacation planned to Ireland including a return flight from Dublin to Chicago on Aer Lingus. Unfortunately the coronavirus pandemic rose and we decided to do the the responsible action and cancelled our trip . Another airline we were taking and all of our hotels were very cooperative and totally refunded our reservations. Not so with Aer Lingus as they refused to refund our money. Very disappointing from an industry that provides the vehicle for such a pandemic to occurr in the first place . I feel we were penalized for making a responsible decision to cancel	0
I have just used Air China for the first time and had a horrible experience. We traveled to Beijing from Houston late October with tickets bought in May. Our return to Houston was scheduled for October. We arrived at the airport to be told the flight was canceled due to aircraft problems to be told the following day that was a lie. Apparently, for financial reasons Air China canceled both Friday and Sunday flights months ago but didn’t tell everybody. Now changing a very long, costly international flight is already a very poor customer service, but not making absolutely sure everyone realizes such a major change has happened is the worst I have ever seen in an airline. To make matters worse we had to fight to get a hotel and were sent to a very very poor, dirty one. Food was promised to be included but we got there only the buffet consisting of cold chicken nuggets and old eggs were included. Real food had to be paid. When every airline would be trying to make it up, since it was not my fault the flight was changed, getting a nice hotel and food, and an upgrade, Air China simply got us even worse service. I also had to buy my own food since the option was not edible. I travel a lot, have used multiple American and European airlines, being frequent flyer on several. Air China is the worse. Ever.	0
Air China is the worst airline ever, their customer service is inexistent, they do not answer calls. On hold for over 2 hours each time and half their Phone numbers for customer service do not work / are paying. Their premium economy is a complete rip-off, you basically get the same seat as economy with one seat next to you empty. I will never fly this airline again and do not recommend anyone to fly it. With this type of customer service.	0
Houston to Beijing. The flight was good, but not the customer services and the website. The website is confusing even when we typed in the correct/exact ticket # and name it did not recognize our name and we can't do anything online for any change. Also when requesting the mileage to be added to my other Star Alliance frequent flyer # the customer representative behaved very rudely and without any courtesy, made me wonder who actually is the customer here. Will not fly with them again.	0
Frankfurt to Shanghai with Air China. Terrible service at check in counter and terrible online check in. They would not let me pick a seat online. They said many people have the same problem. I was at the counter 5 hours before the flight to check in. They gave me the worst seat in the front row and did not ask. Luckily there were better empty seats behind me, so I switched. So stupid that they don’t care enough even about business class customers to offer them a good seat. At least on the plane they were better.	0
They make you check your bags for a fee of 30 USD plus fees. Hence no traveller wants to pay this fee, and you therefore have 130+ people bringing on a carry on suit case. There simply is not enough room. Customers getting frustrated with one another when people move bags without asking. We left late due to the debacle of trying to find room for these bags. Not good when we are already going to be arriving back into Toronto after 11.30pm. Then they ask you take anything that is not a wheely suitcase and put it by your feet, which serves to only reduce the meagre leg room provided on these flight. What with zero entertainment and wifi that we have to pay for, I will never travel this airline again. Air Canada you should be ashamed that you operate this service showing your name.	0
Air Canada is the worst airline I have ever flown with. My family of four flew to Athens, Greece from New York and Chicago with a connection at Toronto. In addition to long delays, Air Canada forced us to check in our carry-ons. One of my son's suitcase never made it to Greece. Ten days later and we have no word about where the suitcase is. At the beginning we were told that the suitcase went to Paris but its traces got lost after that. The customer service is horrible. We spent many hours trying to call an Air Canada number we were given but nobody answered the phone after waiting on the line for over one hour at a time. Air Canada ruined our vacation. We will never use this airline in the future. Stay away.	0
Atyrau to Rome via Moscow. They gave me a hand written boarding ticket and a tagged my luggage with just a slip with FCO written on it . I questioned where is the electronic tag, how is my bag going to get to Rome ? It fine they said don't worry. When I got to Moscow I had to get a boarding pass for next flight to Rome and Aeroflot said they have no record of any luggage for me, I explained what the Aeroflot staff in Kazakhstan said and they said we don't know if your luggage will be on the connecting flight or not. Arrived in Rome, no luggage, I have contacted Aeroflot in Rome and Moscow and they could not care less about my luggage, second day now and no response from their lost luggage department. I have my trip in tatters, I need to fly to Croatia and I have no luggage and no idea if it will be found. Unbelievably shocking service.	0
Bangkok to Moscow. I selected a window seat and once I got to check in the lady said she was changing my seat, I asked is it by a window to which she replied yes. Once on the plane I wasn't given a window seat so this was the first of my frustrations. The plane was old, the screen was broken and not stay in an upright position. I found the staff not helpful at all. On the way home I bought a picture and Aeroflot charges me 100 dollars to fly my picture.  I will never fly again with aeroflot.	0
London to Tokyo via Moscow this month. The airline did not load my luggage on to the connecting flight in Moscow not once, but twice - on both my outward and return journeys. I flew to Tokyo from Heathrow with a stopover in Moscow. Unfortunately, the first leg of the flight was delayed by an hour or so (with no reason given). As a result, I was rushed through the airport in Moscow and was frantically ushered on to my connection. When I arrived in Tokyo Narita I was informed that my case was still in Moscow. It was two days before I received it at the address I was staying at. I did consider the idea that this could happen again on my return journey three weeks later, but surely not? Oh yes it could. This time there were no delays, yet when I returned to London I was told that my bag was still in Moscow and could take a day or two to be delivered to me. I was given a number to call that looked suspiciously like a mobile number and told that they could not guarantee when I got my bag back. Early the next morning, I tried to call to find out where my bag was. The number given went straight to voicemail. I tried to call it several times, but still nothing. I then tried to call the baggage customer helplines. All three numbers were busy and I didn't succeed in getting through to anyone over a five hour period. Calling the baggage handler responsible for Aeroflot at Heathrow was also useless, and they passed me another mobile number that also didn't answer. I then tried calling the Aeroflot desk at Heathrow, and was grateful to speak to a human being. The lady was very kind and eventually called me back to say that she had found my bag, and I could come in to collect it myself. I will never fly with this airline again. It seems there are lots of similar cases of this kind of thing happening in Moscow SVO airport.	0
I book a flight with Aeromexico a few weeks ago, now they cancelled the flight 2 weeks from the departure. They refused to refund the money that i pay, that it was a round trip from Chile to Canada, (not cheap), even if they cancelled the flight. Is not the pandemic, some planes are flying anyway, and airports are open for the people that need it and have all the requirements to do so. Is them, they are just taking the money from people and cancelling flights. The only option that they give me was an open ticket with them. That means, just 1 ticket. that also I have to pay the difference and also an expensive fee for service?	0
Unfortunately there was an aggressive man on the plane, he pushed hard against my seat several times when I put my seat back to sleep. The staff did not act adequately, the flight attendant even walked away when the man became physical (he pushed hard against my seat). Supposedly to get security (I think?), But the flight attendant returned alone. When I later stated that I did not feel safe and wondered aloud if it would happen again, the response was laughable. "We don't know if he'll do it again, ma'am." I didn't feel taken seriously and was very scared for the rest of the flight. I sat down somewhere else, and I never came back to it. I felt unsafe for 8 hours in this 10 hour flight.	0
I had a flight booked from London to Mexico City on 2nd April, obviously this was cancelled because of the coronavirus pandemic. I have since then spent countless hours on the phone trying to reach them as well as emailing them, they either never reply or just ignore what you say in your email. The Civil Aviation Authority confirmed that a cancelled flight has to be refunded if the passenger wants to, but Aeromexico refuse to offer any refund. Honestly some of the worst customer service I have ever seen. Aeromexico at least you've accomplished one thing, that is to persuade me to never fly again with you. Terrible terrible airline ! Do not fly with them - you with be riddled with problems if you do.	0
My flight was cancelled because of COVID-19, and they refused to refund me, like many other reviews suggest. I haven't received a credit either. I submitted a complaint to the U.S. Department of Transportation because flights operating in the US are required to refund passengers after cancelling their flights.  I also disputed the charges through my credit card company. Aeromexico is very unethical!	0
London to Santorini via Athens. Aegean charges an exorbitant price for minimal weight excess. Be sure you will be charged £55 for an extra kilo. It is certainly the most unfair airline I've ever been. There were no prior email warning/reminders, which other airlines have the decency to do so. Ryanair hanks way higher on fairness and customer service. I can securely say that I'll never fly with Aegan again.	0
Heraklion to Athens. First attendants skipped my son when serving water. When he asked attendant for water, she replied just a second and just went on serving other passengers. When I asked another flight attendant if we could get some water. She politely replied that was no problem and disappeared.	0
London to Dublin with Aer Lingus. Not the worst airline I have ever used, but the one that I would least recommend. Even though I should have been able to rebook my flight to a day later, it was simply not possible to get any response via email or phone. in the end, I was forced to the flight I didn't want to take. PS: I did get a response to my emails. Stunning three weeks later.	0
Prague to Dublin. Shocking behaving during coronavirus crisis. Despite coronavirus shutting down my country/borders I cancelled all my flights with Aer Lingus and they refund only 10 % of the price. Shame on this airline for not helping people during a global crisis and national emergency.	0
Shannon to Edinburgh. Terrible customer service. Despite Coronavirus shutting down our country / borders and cancelling all events Aer Lingus would not refund our booking. Shocking and appalling. Shame on this airline for not helping people during a global crisis and national emergency. Will never fly Aer Lingus ever again.	0
We are due to fly from Dublin in April to Izmir. Aer Lingus are offering a reschedule to an unknown date in the future and waving the admin fee or a voucher. I want an immediate refund.	0
Islamabad to Melbourne via Beijing. My overall experience was horrible. Air China may be good value for money but be prepared for all the troubles and headaches that you will face with this airline from their uncomfortable seats, not working monitors, stained and smelly seat covers, delayed departure (one day) to loss of baggage. With Air China you are like a guinea pig you don't know where the flight is taking you, you cannot communicate with anyone in China if you don't speak Chinese. Long story short - flight took off to get passengers from Karachi but diverted back being 5mins to land to Islamabad and finally took off again one day late from the city of origin Islamabad, arrived one day late in Beijing (transit) of course the connecting flight was missed because of the airline. Failed to accommodate me or compensate for anything - just gave 350 CNY = $50 AUD to spend 13 hours in Beijing airport. Resting charge minimum starts 180 CNY per hour and 165 CNY to take a shower. My luggage had to stay in Beijing as I couldn't pass through customs, the airline failed to get me my luggage and asked me to claim it lost when I get home while my luggage was one floor away. Spent 13 hours on a bench in Beijing then they arranged for me to take a flight from Hong Kong to Melbourne as there were no flights for the next 3 days from Beijing itself (according to airline) however there were many flights. So all the way to Hong Kong the airport closed while we were in the air - I understand the situation but Air China lands in a city (Shenzhen) where they don't have any staff, any counter, any office or anything related to Air China. So I was again stuck in Shenzhen immigration. Immigration was forcing me to contact the airline, on many attempts by using the officer's phone I failed to get through, the immigration gave up and forced me to buy the earliest flight possible from Shenzhen to get out of the airport. For 12 hours stuck in 3x3 meter spot, no one from Ari China showed up to help or look for the passenger who is their responsibility to arrange accommodation for and arrange the flights for. After 12 hours Shenzhen immigration officers forces me to buy a ticket and claim it back from Air China as we did not hear anything from them. Coming back home after and seeking reimbursement, took 45 days Air China offered TCV Transportation Credit Voucher to spend only with Air China within 12 months. Like are you kidding me, this travel I had was after 3 years and I know for the next 2 years I am not traveling anywhere so their TCV meant nothing but gas and air, after telling them I will not be traveling for the next 12 months they suggest I give the TCV to a friend or family. Like seriously is this some sort of a joke. I was forced to buy another ticket twice more expensive than the entire return trip while I had already paid for one and Air China failed to provide any assistance and service for, they ask me to pass the voucher to family and friend. I earned that money, it is a whole month worth of rent to pay here in Australia and they ask me to pass it to a family or friend. None of my friends or family would ever travel with an irresponsible airline after what I had been through took me 4 days to get home (Melbourne). I do not recommend anyone to fly with Air China. Seriously, pay $100 more and fly with a decent airline that covers their shits and takes responsibility.as	0
Madrid to New York via Toronto. Air Canada has the worst customer service and - well, service in general - of any airline I've ever flown on. Countless delays followed by several cancelled flights, no help from "customer service", non-existent support when you try to call and make contact. I could go on and on and on. Plus good luck trying to get reimbursed for their incompetence. This is basically a criminal organization masquerading as an airline. Avoid at all costs.	0
Booked and paid for Premium Economy seats, but due to their wrong rows numbering, got regular seats. Food was no different from other passengers. So the Premium is simply a scam. The flight attendant was rude. She likely missed the class how to be courteous and how make passengers feel good. I am a frequent traveller so I am qualified to say Air Canada is from far, my worst flying experience ever.	0
Worst experience ever. They kept changing the flight time, we had to over go a delay of one hour and when we finally got to the airport we waited for an extra one hour because there was another plane in our spot. Not recommended.	0
Rome to Moscow. The only good thing is the food and the flights leave on time. Nobody smiles at me. No TV or radio on this short flight. They provided Russian newspaper.  They lost our luggage. and it's our 2nd day without our bags.	0
New York to Los Cabos. This is the most insensitive/money hungry airline I’ve ever had the displeasure of doing business with! My mom and I planned a trip to Cabo. However, due to COVID-19, we were on lockdown and as a result the date I booked the ticket for wouldn’t work. My mom is an essential employee and would not be granted the permission to take days off from work. Additionally, the extension date we were given would have coincide with my school. I explained I didn’t necessarily want to cancel my trip, I would have been fine with a later date then their deadline. They refused to change the date or give me a refund. Mind you I’m not an essential worker and lost my job due to the virus. They didn’t at all care, the only thing that mattered was their money! If you can’t count on a company during a tough time like this, when can you?	0
I don't recommend Aeromexico. I had a return La Paz to Mexico city and they canceled it probably because there were not enough passengers. Immediately, I tried to call the call center in the United States, without response then Canada, without response, then a center in Europe, without response, too. I ended up buying another flight, so an additional cost with an expensive cost with the time spent on the phone because the internet was bad, and I couldn't call by Skype. So I wrote to their complaints department to request the reimbursement of half of my ticket (I made Mexico La Paz) which took weeks to answer me. And the response was up to Aeromexico's indignity. "After a careful review of your case, we are sorry to inform that we will not be able to grant your request. Please allow us to share with you the reasons behind our decision: unfortunately, since your flights were canceled as a direct result of the regulations enforced during the COVID-19 threat, no refunds can be offered under those grounds. Nevertheless, since your flights were canceled due to the COVID-19 threat, your ticket qualifies for our protection policy that would allow us to rebook your unused flights, with the same traveling route and cabin, at no cost to you, as long as the new flights are completed before February the 28th of 2021.  If the aforementioned policy does not meet your needs, you can make use of our flexibility policy that would allow you to make use of the value of your unused flights and change your traveling route or cabin, to book and complete your new flights before February the 28th of 2021 however, in this case, as there would be a change of route or cabin, if the value of the new flights desired exceeds the value of the original ones acquired, the difference in cost would have to be paid.We apologize for the inconveniences this decision may cause. We hope that you find our airline’s efforts useful." The answer was in April and my flight in March and their inaccessible call centers probably because they canceled a lot of flights. Aeromexico has no sense of service and no respect for its passengers.	0
Bogota to Oaxaca via Mexico City. Given the current Covit-19 Pandemic and flight calculations world wide, an the fact that AeroMexico canceled and changed our flights five (5) times and on the fish time they did not provide a flight for the first flight [Bogota, Colombia, to Mexico City, Mexico] of our trip with them. And the fact that the last flight [Mexico City, Mexico, to Oaxaca, Mexico] was scheduled to land over 23 hours after our original booking time of arrival. We could not leave our home country so we had to cancel our trip and all flights. Every Airline carrier refunded our money except for AeroMexico who will not give us our money back. Complaint: It is a fact that we purchased two [2] Basic fair tickets, that Aeromexico clearly states are non-refundable. But I find Aeromexico’s business practices morally questionable and their rules and regulations to be deliberately vague and lacking in transparency. As they are able to place all of un-natural and natural occurrences and squarely places the blames on shoulders of its customers. Take for example the current Covid-19 pandemic. People, families, and whole nations are being quarantined by their local governments. And there is a very large percentage of people who last month had a full-time job, had money to do what they wanted in life, and did not know that their job my be on and will most likely be placed in unemployment until this pandemic can be better managed by the world. And at the same time people have to worry about meeting basic need and essentials [food, medical]. Then there are companies like Aeromexico who refuse to return their customers money when the service provider cannot provide a service. In the current humanitarian crisis that this pandemic is causing people all over the world, it must be nice for a service provider to take money for a service that their clients can’t possible use and then provide only two [2] forms of compensation (1) new reservation at a later date, (2) or an open book-ticket. But given the epidemic and the growing percentage of deaths worldwide. It seems to me that people should get their money back so they can use it take care of themselves and their family. And yet it seems financially advantageous for a company to keep their clients’ money giving this worldwide Covit-19 epidemic and the fact that your clients have an ever-growing chance of dying from Covit-19 and get to keep that money for basically doing nothing. I find this possibility sickening and I hope this is not a business practice of AeroMexico. As a customer myself who cannot travel because Covid-19 and whose money you are basically trying to steal because I need it back and for the fact you canceled our original flight. I hope that I can get my money back. As it stands I am just unhappy customer who will never forget this.	0
London Heathrow to Mexico City. Avoid. Their notion of Customer Service, doesn't understand what a Customer is, never mind the Service. Being told by the British PM to "not leave your home" because of COVID-19 was not understood as a reason as to why my flight needed to be cancelled. Asked to move it to another date - they did not understand how that would be possible. Utterly useless. Also, way overpriced, unless you get me there in half the time, review your ticket prices. It's a joke.	0
Chicago  to Dublin. Due to the pandemic I decided not to fly to Dublin tomorrow as planned. Aer Lingus refused to refund or exchange my ticket. I understood that was the case when the ticket was purchased last November, but under the circumstances I would think the airline would work with us. However, they refused to do anything and said it was our choice not to go on the trip. Why would we travel when everyone is advising against it. I'm very sad to cancel my trip but Aer Lingus is making it worse by not refunding our money. I was told if my ticket was purchased after March 6 I could get a refund. Who buys an international ticket that close to a trip date? My flight is scheduled for March 15.  I will never recommend this airline to anyone.	0
The response from this airline to the Coronavirus is highly unethical. I had a flight to Dublin, yet the government of Ireland announced the country was going to be on lock down due to the virus . I was not willing to get stuck there nor risk my health, yet the airline imposed a 100$ fee to change flight and the change difference ranged from 300-800 for different dates. They are offering no options to customers other than forfeiting all amount of the trip, knowing there is an epidemic. Most of the other airlines at least have offered to cancel fees for changing dates. This is the worst airline and obviously have no human values within their company.	0
The response to the COVID-19 situation by Aer Lingus has been lackluster to say the least. Aer Lingus has literally not a single mention of "COVID" or "coronavirus" across their website, even as they have shut down all flights to and from Italy.  Also, despite the "Avoid Travel" warnings from the US CDC and State Dept, they offered no flexibility in terms of changing my existing flight to Rome, but once I was here, they axed all flights to and from Italy. After they had cancelled my flight, I called them, and found they were unable to accommodate me in a flight from Geneva, which they serve, and is the nearest location they serve that's accessible by train. Also my understanding is they would have charged me any fare difference for such a flight. RyanAir saved me in this situation with a direct flight to Dublin, and honestly they are leagues beyond Aer Lingus in terms of response to the COVID situation. The Aer Lingus cabin crew are excellent however, shame the leadership at Aer Lingus has done such a bad job planning and responding to the COVID situation.	0
Toronto to Dublin. It is astounding that Aer Lingus is not allowing people who have existing bookings (ours is for tomorrow - Mar. 11) to change them without the per person / per direction change fee, which is not cheap. They have announced that new bookings can be changed with no fee, but are not making this policy change retroactive. I'm not even asking for a refund - a credit for 12 months would be acceptable. I live in Canada and have always flown Air Canada internationally, but decided to give the flag airline for the Republic of Ireland a try this time for our first trip to Ireland. Friends of ours have gotten credit from Air Canada, so I guess I have learned my lesson. My understanding is that most airlines are allowing changes with no change fees. We are so disappointed to have to cancel our trip to Ireland - our daughter was in tears. We feel very badly for the small businesses in Ireland, like B&Bs and hotels, but they were all willing to give us a refund, even when rules should have prevented it, but not Aer Lingus. If Aer Lingus won't offer flexibility, we won't be using Aer Lingus in the future, and I will actively recommend to anyone who will listen that they shouldn't either.	0
Boston to Dublin. We had to cancel our flight due to the virus outbreak and they would not waive their change fee of $600 to change our flights to the Summer, they will waive all change fees for new customers only, clearly sending the message that they do not care about their current customers while whey are trying to entice new business. It is times like this that a company shows its real corporate morals and what they really think about their customers. This is not how one builds customer loyalty. We will never book with them again.	0
Beijing to London. After I got off the plane, I found no baggage, I found that there was no result for about two hours, and there was a suitcase that was exactly the same as my suitcase. Brand, model, color are the same) has been unclaimed. After the airport staff said that let me "contact Air China, Air China has passenger contact information" and gave a baggage agency company list file number, and said it would help find, after the exit my son to China Air China The phone was transferred to the baggage office, and then my son suggested that the airline contact the owner of the unclaimed box. Then the customer service said, "Sorry, our airline does not have the customer's contact information, but we recorded the file." And said it twice. My son contacted GBS baggage agency at 7:30 pm London time on the 29th. During the exchange, the staff called "this passenger took the wrong baggage", but the baggage was not found. After that, I called again at 11.59 in the evening. The customer service still said that if there was any problem, "please contact the London airport", after my repeated questioning, the customer service changed the name and said "Contact China Air China's partner company at the London airport" Third-party outsourcing companies are completely unable to provide effective and reasonable solutions. When it comes to allowing Air China’s partner companies in London to reply to the process of this incident every day, the customer service said that "no permission, no idea, only message", in my After mentioning the compensation, the customer service said that “the baggage will be searched for within 21 days. If the baggage is not found after 21 days, the baggage tag will be lost and the airport will be compensated.” But as far as I know, it is only passive waiting to find the baggage. The person who got the wrong baggage contacted the airport, but until now, Air China did not receive the wrong number of luggage.	0
Rome to Bangkok via Beijing. We had 2 problems with this airline, and recommend you to try to fly with another company. Beijing to Bangkok with scheduled departure at 2:15 PM when we reached the gate, nothing was written about a potential delay after 1 hour (at 3:20 PM) I went to the desk, and the girl said to me these words: “flight is in delay, no more info available”, so we didn’t know when it was going to depart, and not even the cause. Long story short, after going several times to the gate desk with nothing or poor answers given, the flight departed at 6:50 PM, and landed at 11:50 PM (scheduled at 6:35 PM). Had the most terrible Customer Care Assistance experience: return flight from Bangkok to Rome, we had a transfer of 7,5 hours at Beijing, and reading at the company’s policy we saw that we had the right to have an hotel room. I tried multiple times to book it via web site, but it always crashed (I tried something like 50 times in 2 weeks) called the hotline, and after 6 minutes it always would go down (payed money for every call) at Bangkok, we asked for help (before doing the check in), and they said that they couldn’t do anything, and that at Beijing for sure they would’ve fixed. Landed at Beijing, we went to the Lounge, cause Air China Desks were not present (as in Bangkok), and the only thing that the girl at the desk did was call the hotline (really, I am not joking) at the hotline, they said 3 different things: 1) first, that we needed to book the hotel at least 2 weeks before 2) then, that we had to book the hotel at least 24 hours before 3) in the end, that their policy is to book at least before checking in after a 1,5 hour call, in the end, I even tried to ask if it was at least possible to stay in the lounge, and they said: “sure, but you’ll have to pay”. One last thing, the girl's supervisor at the hotline didn't speak English, only Mandarin. After what I’ve been through, I will stay as much away as possible from this company, and I advise all of you to do the same. Embarrassing company.	0
Vancouver to Islamabad via Beijing. One of the worst airline experience. First delayed or lost luggage for 3 weeks. Then 2 piece completely damaged. They are offering free hotel outside Bejing Airport but it's scam since they know that airport would not let you out at all. We were family of 5 and stuck at airport for 24 hours among lot other families. Transit lounge booking is also pathetic. Bad food seats and customer service. No or very few English - great barrier. They offer cheap rates but worst service.	0
Los Angeles to Bangkok via Beijing. Absolutely positively worst airline in the business. Horrible service, horrible business class. The lounges are an absolute joke. Never consider them again, no matter how much the cost.	0
Quebec to Montreal. Multiples change and revised time because of technical issue.  Never again will I use Air Canada Rouge or Air Canada if I have other choice.	0
Worst flight ever! First off no entertainment at all not even charger port not even a usb plug.! The seat was so uncomfortable and I had a preferred seat? I was sore all over from that flight. The snack part annoyed me, when am flying to Jamaica with a air bistro voucher it's a meal and 2 snacks but, when am flying back to Toronto it's a meal and 1 snack for the same price. I am in shock that any sun destination you pick with Air Canada you're stuck with Air Canada Rouge. Absolutely terrible. The staff was cold and stand offish. Never again will I fly this airline.	0
Boarded SU213 from Hong Kong to Moscow at 11am on July 6th 2017, waited for 4hrs and then told to get off the plane and come back 8hrs later. We came back and boarded and again sat for another 4hrs and once again asked to get off the plane and the flight was cancelled. We decided to cancel our Moscow tour.	0
I have been thoroughly disappointed when they cancelled my flight in the very last minute. Flight cancellations are not rare occurrences, of course. However, the way Aeroflot handled the cancellation left a lot to be desired. I was notified by my travel agent initially via email and apparently, was extremely shocked. I then phoned the agent but to no avail and given that there was no after-hour support in my region, I called their reservations hotline in Russia, only to find that some of their staff did not even speak comprehensible English. To complicate things, they denied the reservations code they themselves supplied, claiming that there was no numbers but only letters, when it clearly contained 2 numbers! After a rather unproductive 5-minute conversation where the staff kept prompting me to repeat and verify the reference code, they asked me for the ticket number. Guess what? They then forwarded me to another service agent, kind of implying it was a special case and they couldn't handle it. When I was finally connected, I was asked to supply the reference code again and they once again said their reference codes do not contain numbers. Of course, that member of staff also ended up asking me to quote the ticket number and sounded hugely impatient when I said "hold on let me retrieve it" with a long and deep breath. Mind you, it took me less than 15 seconds to retrieve it. When I finally started quoting the number, that staff member did not respond until I repeated a few times the first 6 digits and the deafening silence caused me to think the call was interrupted. Yet, after a few "hellos" he finally went "CONTINUE!" and that was one of the most impolite commands I'd ever encountered in phone conversations with airline personnel! To make things worse, he then said he needed to check my booking details further and put me on hold without even saying anything like "please hold the line". After waiting for 20 minutes, the call was disconnected and no one ever rang me back. I had had enough and decided to book myself on another airline.	0
Berlin to Athens. Aegean are in most respects an excellent airline. But you should be warned never to buy goods from their in flight shop. I bought a pair of Bluetooth headphones. They were extremely uncomfortable not being large enough for an average adult male head. It was clear from the moment I put them on that they were not "fit for purpose" and only really suitable for a child. Aegean refused to take them back even though from my point of view the goods were faulty as no adult male could wear them comfortably. So experience the excellent service Aegean provide but avoid the temptation to buy goods in the air. If they are totally unsuitable you won't get a refund.	0
Very dissatisfied with Aer Lingus’s customer service and policy concerning flight change charges due to corona virus. Disappointed with their unsympathetic response, especially since other airlines are waiving change fees due to this crisis. Am of course willing to pay the additional charge for a summer flight, but at this point, will never use Aer Lingus again and advise family and friends to look elsewhere. Not customer friendly.	0
Los Angeles to Bangkok via Beijing. The worst business class flight of any airline hands down - just cheap. Just attempt to reach them by phone. Well the phrase rings true " You get what you pay for". At any cost of savings absolutely not worth it - save yourself the trouble.	0
Toronto to Holguin. If you want to ruin your vacation and not get the compensation you can choose Air Canada. This if the right company to help you with it. Also you will have a lot of troubles to get in touch with reps to try to resolve any problems with either Air Canada or Air Canada Vacation. I will never ever use this company again.	0
Vancouver to Lima via Mexico City.  I bought a ticket 3 months before my flight. It said last ticket and I wanted to be on the same flight with my wife and mother inlaw. So buying it under impulse it was $1650.00. Then my wife paid another $500 to get upgraded seats so we can all sit together and we have a baby. So she decided to check online a week ago if there was any seats available on the same flight. And behold there were many. The price was $1200. Then my wife emailed customer service and they told her nothing they can do. She then decided to check our seats, and they never did upgrade them. So I called them. I was on the phone for an hour until I finally asked to speak to a supervisor. He said to check my email and they will upgrade our seats. I waited and no email. 3 days went by and still no email. So I called again. They looked into it and asked us for more money to upgrade the seats. I told them I'm not giving them anymore money. After 2 hrs of arguing with them, they finally gave us the seats. They wouldn't do anything to adjust the price. They wouldnt give us anything for their mistake. I was so stressed with this. We'll see if they even give us the seats that we paid for when we fly next week. I will never fly with them again, even if it's for free. They are the worst business ever.	0
Amsterdam to Mexico City. This is the worst airline ever. The seats are tiny and you cant move at all and really hard. The good is awful and you get two small meals on a ten hour flight, and one glass of water. The staff is rude, unfriendly.	0
Kansas City to Cancun. I booked through google flights and in the process somehow the dates of travel were changed. I booked the flight so I messed that up but I called the booking agency and they said they would take care of it. They tried to change my flight but Aeromexico wouldn't allow it. I reached out to Aeromexico and asked them to let me switch flights, they had open flights on the days that would work and I was happy to pay the increased fee for the new flights. The travel dates I needed were sooner than the booked flights and since they had open seats on the flights that would work I don't see any reason why they wouldn't have let me switch flights even if I was charged to do it. Their recommendation was to get on the plane anyway, knowing that it was after my work conference was over. Needless to say I won't select this airline again since now I'm going to pay for my ticket twice.	0
San Francisco to Mexico City. Horrible customer service experience. Booked Aeromexico operated flight through Delta, and while seats showed as reserved on Delta's side, it was impossible to verify this on Aeromexico's system (the carrier actually operating the flight). Apparently, every time I logged into Aeromexico's website, it automatically erases my seat selection, which is insane. Therefore, I had no guarantee that the seats were actually reserved! Horrible customer experience in this day and age	0
Athens to Bucharest with Aegean Airlines. This company has services which go from bad to worse. Last year they were bad, now they are worst. Much worse. The tagging of the luggage was a never ending process with maximum bothering system, consisting in 3 different people from the Aegean trying to use scanners which were not working and redirecting us from one to the other. The process lasted long to infinite because we were seven persons in the group. Moreover, after that, when boarding the bus which lead to the plane, the personnel insisted in a more than aggressive voice and body language in us going into a very crowded bus in which there wasnt any room left for us. More than that, we explained that we could not separate the members of our group because we were 7 and not everyone was speaking english. They separated us nevertheless between two different buses and one of the passengers had a panic attack. We are very malcontent and disappointed with the attitude of the people working for this company with which we interacted during this flight. And the flight was 45 minutes late, of course, this could not have missed from the final picture!	0
I was flying from Frankfurt to Boston via Dublin. At the counter in Frankfurt I and about 20 other passengers were told by Aer Lingus staff that they would not check us in because Aer Lingus flights that day from Dublin into the US were cancelled. They did not give an explanation as to why although later I was told that it was 'operational problems'. We were sent to a separate desk with generic airport booking employees unrelated to Aer Lingus for rebooking. These airport people had to call the regular Aer Lingus hotlines in order to be able to rebook anyone, but these hotlines were busy for more than an hour, and the Aer Lingus people in those call center were only allowed to process 3 rebookings in a single call, drawing this whole process out unnecessarily. During this time the flight to Dublin had departed and the original Aer Lingus front desk people had disappeared. It took 3 hours until my rebooking was looked into, at which time most alternative transatlantic flight options for that day were gone. So were all the options with any of their partner airlines with which they allow free rebookings (of which there are few in the first place). So I was told to take a hotel and wait for a flight the next day.  I instead had to book a flight for the same day via British Airways via London on my own and had to pay over 2000EUR for that. Most of that money I now have as a loss, but at least according to EU regulation Aer Lingus owes me a compensation of 600EUR which would at least pay for a part of it. In phone calls and mail communication they have now started to claim that the flight had not been cancelled it had only been delayed and they don't owe me compensation. I checked the flight history on Flightaware and saw that EI0139 on 1/7 did indeed fly. The reason for this mess up I can't fathom. In any way, since they barred me from the flight, they owe me 600EUR regardless if the flight in the end would have been possible or not. While I'll eventually get the 600EUR, the time and money wasted so far both with the situation during the trip and dealing with them in the aftermath is enormous. And greatest is the disappointment with Aer Lingus. I have flow with them a couple of times and from those experiences had thought them to be a half way solid airline. But the level of disorganization that they have shown that morning in Frankfurt dwarfs anything I have ever seen before.	0
New York to Bangkok via Beijing. I've been traveling for years and this is the 1st and last time I will ever use them. I just got married and my husband and I planned a 2 month honeymoon to Asia. We purchased a round trip from JFK with a layover in Beijing before arriving in Bangkok. The return flight was from Hong Kong with layover in Beijing before landing in Newark, NJ. Our flight in April to Bangkok experienced multiple delays which caused us to miss our layover in Beijing by 5 minutes. We actually had a 75 mins layover in Beijing, but due to the delays, we and almost everyone else on our plane missed our transfers. They couldn't tell their other planes to wait 5-10 mins for everyone to make their flights?? Instead, we saw most of the fliers crowded around the Air China counter. Everyone had to get a temporary visa and herd onto their buses to spend a night in a disgusting, filthy motel because the next flights out were the following day. My husband and I missed our 1st night in Bangkok and of course weren't reimbursed in any way. Throughout the ordeal, we saw all of the passengers at the Air China counters and they, like us, were appalled and furious with their lack of customer service. They just don't care. Now for our flight returning back to NY from Hong Kong on 6/17. We received an email saying that Air China changed our flights so we called Chase Travel. We saw that they changed the planes, times and moved us from Premium Economy to Economy. Why? We paid the extra amount for Economy. Once on the phone with Chase, we selected another flight for 7:30AM that was Premium Economy. We even waited on the phone until we received the email confirmation from Chase for our new flights. So on 6/17 we get to HK airport to check in and they only have my husband's name and not mine. Air China said I was on a 11PM flight and that it was Chase's fault. That was not the case. My husband and I spent hours on the phone with Chase and Air China, and Air China were the ones to cancel my ticket (we have no idea why). Instead of just putting me on the 7:30AM flight, they kept my husband on hold for 50 minutes, then finally told him that they could change his flight for $4000 to be with me for the 11PM. How does that make sense? Why are we being punished for Air China's mistake? They changed our flights then split us up but putting us on different flights that land in different airports. Then they have the audacity to tell him to pay $4000 for him to be on the 11PM when they could've just put me on the 7:30AM which was confirmed. They could have even put us on the next Air China flight after that. My husband ended up purchasing completely new flights with EVA which was $2800 compared to the $2500 round trip with Air China! It's now 7/25 and I've been on the phone with Chase for almost 4.5 hours because the supervisor is trying to get Air China to give us a refund. Rather than admitting their fault and giving us the credit owed, they are trying to contest it.  We, the passengers, mean nothing to them.	0
I'm writing this on behalf of my mom and dad, who had a trip booked to Vancouver from Las Vegas. Unfortunately, a month before the trip date, they weren't able to fly anymore due to my mother's stage 4 cancer diagnosis. There was no compensation given for the canceled flight. Not a credit.	0
Toronto to Phoenix. 8:55 a.m. departure on AC 1836. 90 Minute delay originally posted. Then we get on plane actually go through de-icing and then we are told the lavatories don't work and we need maintenance. Back to the terminal. Then we are told we all have the right to deplane after ages on the tarmac. Final announcement is that we all need to deplane as the pilots have gone over time. We get off plane and are only told the plane will leave at 2 p.m. (originally an 8:55 a.m. flight). We were told our tickets served as vouchers for food. This actually worked, but in the end we are delayed 6.5 hours headed to a long weekend getaway in Phoenix - lost a complete day at resort but resort still wants its daily fee. We are offered nothing else yet the Passengers Bill of Rights should allow some compensation for delays over 5 hours that are the fault of the airline.	0
Moscow to Yuzhno Sakhalinsk. On check in at Moscow the staff were rude and refused to check me in as one of my bags as it weighed 24kg instead of 23kg, even though my 2nd check in luggage weighed 12kg. They told me to take 1kg out or pay 2000rur or they wouldnt let me fly. Out of the 46kg I was entitled to take I only had 36kg and ended up having to take 1kg out of my luggage and hand carry it onboard. There was only 1 person scanning boarding passes for economy passengers with no help and no proper queue so all customers were just pushing to get to the desk to board. This was highly unorganised and not pleasant. We had to board on a bus even though we were flying on a full B777 while smaller A320's and B737's sat at the gate making the boarding process very uncomfortable . The plane was one of Aeroflot's oldest B777's. The USB charger was broken at my seat and one of the toilets was out of order. They hadn't changed the entertainment from April to May even though they provided the May entertainment guide. The food was terrible and they ran out of the food selection I wanted due to the way they were serving food (back to front rows). For breakfast I got a buckwheat porridge however it wasnt a porridge at all, just a tray full of cooked but dry buckwheat. They don't serve any alcohol on an 8hr flight - if you want some you have to pay for it and if you want a snack you also have to pay for it. Overall Aeroflot provided poor ground and air service and used an old plane for a long flight. I have flown Aeroflot before and sometimes they can be ok, but on this particular case they were poor.	0
London to Mexico City. Booking Cancelled by the airline without notice to the customer. The original booking was modified at the airport counter for an earlier flight. The airline representative sold a new ticket instead of modifying the existing booking. When attempting to check-in for the return flight, it was noticed a message of "contact the airline", The booking was cancelled for not "taking the existing reservation" which it was not modified by the same airline. A new ticket was sold for $1,700 to be able to fly on the same route, which it was paid due to the urgency to return to the UK. In addition. Our luggage was requested to be dropped off at every airport we had a connection. Aeromexico made our trip as inconvenient as possible. First time using the airline. Never again. So Disappointed.	0
Mexico City to New York JFK. The flight attendants on AeroMexico are really rude. When they should be working, they are actually watching movies (see photo). They wake you up by poking you in the leg when you are sleeping to move you to another seat so that they can sit in the seat you're in, to watch movies. How can you be watching movies when you are supposed to be working? The plane is very cold and I got sick from the flight. No refreshments offered. I wrote to complain about this, and nothing was done. In fact, they told me they were going to close my case without doing anything about my complaint. I will not fly AeroMexico again. If I could rate zero stars, I would.	0
Mexico City to Madrid. The treatment that this company gives to their clients is obnoxious.  Lied repeatedly over some delays from saying that the plane was there and 20 minutes later was not at all, saying that the plane was in maintenance and that would be in 1h 30min ready and then there was no plane (again). Changed 3 times to different gateways. All this from midnight to 8. Did not offer any hotel, just after 5am when you cannot check in anyway. I will not even continue but this went on for a while. Worst ever.	0
Santorini to London  via Athens. When my sister and I checked in for the Santorini to Athens flights we had two rollerbags which were labeled cabin baggage on check in by Aegean. (A355 3 June) On our continuing flight to London (A3602 3 June), the gate agent stopped us and demanded that we pay 60 euros for one of our carryons despite the fact they were tagged by Aegean on our previous connecting flight. He would not let us on the plane unless we paid him. We finally paid to not hold up other travelers but in the confusion of this my purse was left on his counter. (not the main check in counter but the one to the side of the door where he collected the money). Immediately upon getting to my seat I noticed the purse missing. I asked the three stewardesses at the front of the plane if I could retrieve my purse at that counter. The man charging us the baggage fee at the last minute could also have run the purse down, and didn't. I could not leave the plane to go up the ramp but they did not offer for one of them to get it for me and instead waited for a young baggage boy to go see it it was there. What could have been accomplished in 5 minutes took at least 15 or more. He came back and said he did not see it. Literally, it was only 5 minutes from the time we got to our seat to when I could have had a stewardess check the countertop. The attendants could have called the gate but didn't or one of them gone to that counter, but they did not. On arrival at Heathrow, the departure agent called Athens for me and the purse was at lost and found with greek police at airport. They had it at the ticket check in stand after all! They gave me the reference number of 2294 and said to call DHL (maybe UPS) to have it couriered to me. I am not a business and have no way of putting the purse (small fabric dark grey shoulder bag 10 x 12") in a box with a label which was suggested for pickup. Aegean Air, when contacted, said I would have to go through Greek lost and found and could offer no further assistance. I will pay if needed for it to be sent. I obviously am not in Athens and do not know anyone to pick the purse up for me there. The ticket agent in London was helpful but all of the numbers I have tried to reach since then either don't respond or give me another number that doesn't respond. He also said we should not have been charged the 60 euros at the last minute on the continuing flight. After calls and emails the airline finally did say they would credit the charge. It now has taken me five days and numerous long distance calls to get my purse returned. Hopefully this coming week UPS in conjunction with an exceptionally helpful lady in lost and found may be able to return my purse.	0
Milano to Chania via Athens. I received an email from Aegean for upgrade (but I did not notice that the upgrade was only for the flight Milano-Athens). My offer (80 euros) was accepted.  For the flight I had two handbags of 3.5 and 7.5 kg as permitted for Business class (less than the 5 and 8 kg allowance for each handbag). It was only in Athens that I was asked to pay for one of these handbags (Athens-Chania was still economy and only one luggage is permitted) either 60 euros in the gate (with a fine) or to run to check-in 124 of Aegean to pay 25 euros. I had to pay for a handbag of 7.5kg 25 euros. If they had informed me in Milano when I checked in my luggage that I would have to pay for the one handbag in Athens, I would have put the content of small handbag in one of my luggage, since there was space in my baggage. The use of the lounge of Aegean in Athens was not permitted. I wrote to Aegean and customer relations department of Aegean who replied and stated twice only that the flight Athens to Chania was economy.  As for the space in the business class. If you get the seats 1A or 1 C is fine. I was in 1F and the space was not something that is worth the money. Also, in row 2 the seats seems to be like the space in the seats+ (why pay for business class?). The folded tables that are opened from the arm of the chair are not convenient.	0
I flew Berlin to Tel Aviv overnight. There was not enough pillows or blankets for everyone. My seat in row 13 would not recline backwards - even though the seats behind had extra space (35 euro extra), and the pitch of the seat made it impossible to get comfortable. The snack was a joke -  chocolate or a packet of crisps. It was obvious they where only concerned in increasing revenue by pushing people to buy overpriced food. Its the last time I will fly Air Berlin.	0
Flew Air Berlin for the first time last week. From the start of online booking I began to have serious doubts; poor user interface, deceptive pricing and more. The airfares initially shown are not comparable to competing airlines because of Air Berlin a la carte pricing. A rule of thumb would be to add at least €70/person when flying within Europe to make a realistic comparison.  Amazingly, the staff made the determination of overweight baggage by lifting my hand carry themselves. An airline can't extract more junk fees based on their subjective impression of weight. They must have a certified scale! Onboard after a chaotic boarding the seats appeared to be very cramped but cabin service was efficient.	0
This airline treated us very bad. My flight was from Mumbai to Beijing to Montréal. But my Mumbai to Beijing got delayed and I missed my flight to Montréal and then they told us that they will arrange a flight but we have to get our bags from I don't know where which was too far from the gates and we ended up missing the flight. After that when we got our bags they gave us the flight to Vancouver and then to Montréal. Literally I had spent 100$ to upgrade to premium economy and 1025 rupees to get a window seat and they gave us the middle seat and it was so horrible that I would not suggest anyone to travel by it. Instead go buy a more expensive ticket and get a comfortable seat.	0
Return flights from London to Bangkok via Beijing booked with Air China seemed a good price deal, but you get what you pay for! Bag delayed on outward journey and airline ‘insisted’ it had to be delivered to my hotel at 3am off a following flight meaning the hotel owner had to get up to receive it, despite being told later on would be more acceptable. In flight ‘entertainment’ was laughable, I’ve never seen such an antiquated system, a total waste of time and definite breach of the word entertainment. Return flight Beijing to London departed around 7am, an 11 hour flight. Weather was clear and sunny, again the above ‘entertainment’ system which resulted in looking out of the window at the views below to pass the time, or should I say ‘trying to’, was repeatedly asked by cabin crew to close my blind, when I asked why (thinking maybe we were flying over a restricted area etc) I was told people were trying to sleep - apparently Air China think it is ok for passengers not sleeping on a long haul day flight to sit in a completely dark cabin for 11 hrs with no in flight entertainment and a low phone battery staring at the back of the headrest in front?! If you like either chicken/rice or shrimp/noodles you’ll be fine for food, otherwise enjoy the bread rolls I saw being offered as alternatives 5 Next time stick with Thai Airways.	0
We were flying back from Orlando to Toronto, originally boarding time 4:10pm and scheduled to land before 8pm. We received multiple notifications about flight delays, each time saying it will be delayed approximately 1 hour. notifications kept coming as we waited with uncertainty, until finally it states plane would arrive at approx. 1:15am. At one point, after 11pm, it seemed like they were trying to genuinely expedite things for us, saying flight will arrive in 30 minutes and do quick turn around. 30 minutes later, another delay saying have to wait for 2 flight attendants to come in, 30 minutes away. another 30 minutes later, they said they are waiting for another attendant to come in, about 30 minutes away! Feels like just making excuses and in the end, boarding time remained unchanged at 1:15 approx. We were not offered any vouchers for meals. Once plane arrived, gate attendant did not show any sympathy regarding the passengers' frustration, but rather demanded and threatened that attendants be treated respectfully and politely, otherwise would turn plane around and none of the passengers will board. Gate attendant was rude, ignoring our questions and requests. If people are not completely frustrated by now, then I can't think of a better way to agitate everyone. Finally arrived back at Toronto around 4:30. after picking up luggages and passing customs, arrived home at 5:30. Unfortunately, had to go to work exhausted. Overall, extremely bad experience.	0
We flew with Aeromexico from Amsterdam to Mexico City and return. On both flights the staff was very unpolite. In particular the treatment of passengers by female flight crew members is rude and without any service attitude that you would even find in cheap European airlines. Multiple times the flight crew was bumping against the edge seats. Food was dashed off on the table without a word. When asked if a meat or vegatarian dish was available, the answer was "no, thats out already" and walking away, rather than "no sorry, but may I offer . instead". Coffee/tea was offered by shouting through the cabin "coffee? tea??" rather than asking "would you like a coffee?". I witnessed that behaviour with all passengers around us likewise. I have never seen such unpolite and rude behaviour in any other European, American or Asian airline carrier. On top of all of that, the return flight was delayed by 1.5 hrs so that we missed our connecting flight, resulting in a 5 hrs. delay of arrival at our final destination. The answer of Aeromexico whether they can offer a compensation was: "we can offer a sincere apology". Finally, the flight was not even expensive, but above average for that route. All in all, I will never travel with Aeromexico again, but will rather resort to well established European or Asian carriers.	0
AeroMexico from Mexico City to Amsterdam. As Ticket package i booked the "Classic Package", which included selecting a seat and luggage up to 23KG included (this package is ~70US$ more expensive, than the basic fare without luggage and seat reservation one-way!). I did the online-checkin-process, which went very smooth and chose my seat. One hour before departure i checked again in the customer-page, if everything was fine - it was and my seat was still blocked for me and the whole row (two more seats free). Until here everything was perfect. But then the boarding started.  My digital boarding pass on my smartphone was rejected several times, so the ground-stuff-guy went with me to the counter and gave me a printed boarding pass with another seat. I asked why they changed my seat without further announcement or communication to me, as passenger? After all i paid additional money, to choose my seat, but now the ground staff changed my seat. He just said, i shouldn't be so excited, it is exactly the same place, just in another part of the airplane. I again started discussing with him, that this behaviour is wrong, changing the booked and additionally paid seats of the customers - but he just turned around and went away. Consequently i ended on the seat directly in front of the toilets, where the seat recline was much less, than on my booked seat - sleeping was a torture for this overnight-connection. My original booked seat got a woman with a kid of about 12 years, they blocked obviously the three seats and laid flat down all the way to Amsterdam. But it is unbelievable, that people, who paid additional money for reserving a seat are removed and moved to another seat, while others, who didn't pay and reserve their seat before, get benefits for free. They could have gotten those seats, but then they needed to pay also additional money for getting this comfort. The stewardess in the airplane was completely incompetent. I showed her the two boarding-passes and she just said in a rude way, that my digital boarding pass is invalid and now i need to move. No offer for an upgrade to the premium-economy or business for this impudence. So, reserving seats against money is in AeroMexico no good option, you anyway have no guarantee to get your reserved and booked seat. I will try to avoid them from now on, even if I flew already a few times with them.	0
Cancun to Vancouver via Mexico City. Aeromexico boarding service was the worst I had experienced. A representative at the gate refused to board our entire family of 5 people (including 6 yrs old daughter) because we passed on to him all 5 passports and boarding passes in one pile (like we usually do everywhere else in the World). Instead he wanted us to enclose each boarding pass into the corresponding passport. It took us about 20 seconds to do so. However the representative tried to send us back to the end of the line. Moreover while discussing he detached an immigration/visitors form from my son's boarding pass (we all have seen him doing so) and few minutes later he claimed we didn't submit the form and he has a right to cancel our flight. To my request to call for his manager and solve the problem hi simply replied 'I'm going to call for a police. It's not your country, you'd better follow my instructions' We found that statement offensive and inappropriate for international airline representative. For our future trips we are not going to consider Aeromexico service any more.	0
Athens to Vienna. Really unhelpful staff. The app is confusing and it left out my name down twice for the two tickets I purchased. Went to check in and realised this so called and was told I’d get my money back but instead they charged me double the price I paid for the ticket and said they were doing me a favour!	0
Los Angeles to Dublin. The planes was old and appeared tired and worn out. The service was minimal similar to a low cost airline. I had to buy wine or beer to have with my meal. Breakfast was bistro bun in a box. There was little interaction from cabin staff. The entertainment system had a limited choice of old movies. It was a sad reflection of Ireland national airline.	0
Dublin to Amsterdam via Belfast. I overbooked hold luggage for a flight in January 2020 Dublin to Amsterdam. I tried to cancel one of the hold bags and get a refund as we wont need anywhere near the load I bought. Can you do this? No chance! There is no facility on their website to do this. We haven't even flown yet.	0
Madrid to Chicago via Dublin. I came to Chicago for a very important meeting for the Thanksgiving weekend and my luggage was delayed. The meeting took place in Gainesville, GA. I had to leave Chicago the next day, November 27th, 2019. Due to the fact that my luggage was delayed I had to buy new clothing and all the necessary items needed that were in my luggage. This was a big inconvenience for me since the meeting I attended was 4 days long. I had to buy 6 extra outfits on top of toiletries. The luggage arrived at the airport 2 days later. At that time I was already in Gainesville, GA. The delivery company had called me while I was in the meeting. I got out of the meeting and I spent 20 minutes on the phone trying to find one of the host's neighbors to receive the luggage at 10PM. This, as well, was a big inconvenience. I asked for a different timing for the next day, but I was denied. When I called the claims department to make a complaint about this incident I was told I should have called earlier. I came from Spain to Chicago for a meeting that took place in GA. My schedule was very tight. I called the claims department as soon as I was available to call. At this point I am very disappointed how everything was handled. A luggage has to be with the passenger at all times. I understand that the luggage arrived 2 days later, but it was too late for me. I was out of town already without clothes and other necessities. The meeting was the highlight of my trip. The host's neighbor wakes up early. They can't be staying up to receive my luggage because the delivery company didn't want to accommodate the delivery for the next day. The neighbor wasn’t obligated to do this for me and if he hadn’t done it, the luggage could have been waited outside for a while. The agent from the Central Baggage Services has told me that I should have called earlier. I haven't traveled to the US to spend all my time on the phone, and I had to use the host's phone being in a different country. I travel every year and I used airplanes before, but this was one of the worst experiences I had! During the flight I didn’t receive food as promised. I wasn’t speaking English, so nobody stopped by to ask me if I was hungry or not. Nobody from the personnel was speaking Spanish. How shameful! I asked for a refund and they tell me they can't give me a refund because they didn't sell the ticket directly with me. They expect the agency where I bought the ticket from to give me a refund. The agency didn't do anything wrong. They just sold a ticket. What should they give me the refund?	0
I booked flight for my parents from Delhi to Vancouver via Beijing. I prebooked my father's wheelchair (he can not walk or stand for longer because of permanent leg injury) and their meals AVML since they are pure vegetarian. It was connecting flight through Beijing. All was going well until they reached Beijing. The wheelchair assist guy took advantage of their age and language barrier. He took them to gate no 32. He then asked for money. My parents told him that they couldn't understand, so he wrote on a paper in English that he wants money to take them to gate. They Didn't know what was happening, after trying to understand him they gave him 400 INR. He asked for more, my parents were not carrying more cash in their hand baggage so they denied outcome of which he left them at gate no 32 and went away saying something in Chinese which they clearly don't understand. They waited there for 2 hours and then my mother decided to go for a walk around and look for the gate number for their next flight because they eventually figured it out that they are stranded on wrong gate. She found a few Indians sitting near gate number 19 who guided her and told her that they are supposed to reach gate number 16 which was really not anywhere near gate number 32. She rushed back to my father and told him the scenario. They couldn't find any other ground staff near by who could understand them so she decided to take my father on a wheelchair by her own along with the 2 hand bags they were carrying. They made it till gate number 20 when someone showed up to help after maybe observing them struggling. The nightmare didn't end there, after taking off for next flight, they were offered Fish to eat. They told the crew that they are vegetarian (I booked AVML which is reflected on their tickets too) and can't eat fish. The crew told them that since there is no vegetarian option available, they have to either eat it or wait for landing to eat in Vancouver. They didn't eat for 12+ hours of flight.  I have read about people sharing their experience but never imagined that something like this could happen to my family. How does some big airlines do such kind of money business without having feelings for their passengers?	0
Ottawa to Tampa. Absolutely the worst experience flying with any airline. Seats so tight together that my sore arthritic knees were forced up against the seat in front of me. The tray table if I had been able to use it would have hit me in the chest. I have been flying since I was 5 years old and so I have 55 years experience when I say that flying has never been so uncomfortable. Top this off with the rudeness we were met with everywhere we turned, especially at check in at the Air Canada counter in Ottawa. Rude, impatient and dismissive treatment. It was truly a horrible experience. Because of the lack of space it was very warm and made us feel claustrophobic. The passengers on the flight kept getting out of their seats as a result. My husband was hit by the cart each time it went by. We are people not cattle.	0
Toronto to Bogota. Do you like waiting on a stationary plane for hours and hours? Are you allergic to water, food, and other simple luxuries? Do you hate getting to a hotel that you've already paid for the day after you were supposed to? If you answered yes to these questions, then boy, do I have an airline for you!	0
Toronto to West Palm Beach. I have flown AC for a few weeks now and noticed they have no on-time arrival statistics because they are continually late. There are tremendous inefficiencies at the gate and on boarding crew, they are not helpful at all. They smile and speak two languages but that does not assist passengers trying to figure out where to put their luggage when there is no room left. Their website is difficult to navigate and the link to Aeroplan is less than stellar. They also are not very accommodating making sure folks stay hydrated in the air. Trying to call or electronically communicate forget it, no answer. Unfortunately, the price of the tickets is no different than any other airline. It does show when there are no regulations and big corporations like Air Canada can do what they want and treat their customers any way they choose. Sometimes a little regulation goes a long way. There are no watchdogs on this airline!	0
Toronto to Belize, delayed by 48 minutes. The flight attendants were rude to me. We were told to get our own alcoholic beverages from the back of the plane when asking for a refill. On our second flight there was no beer on a 5hour flight. Our 4 flights with Air Canada during our vacation was delayed or rescheduled. The airline overbooks flights and then asks people to wait until the next day to fly out.	0
Almost all the AC staff were subpar in their customer service treatment. I remember asking for a tissue on the way back as I was quite sick and the air hostess said she would help after serving the food. So I waited and nothing. I didn't bother reminding her again. I used the restroom. Later on during the flight I had a question and pressed the button and nothing. I understand staff get busy and that's no problem. However, I pressed that button over 5 times throughout the flight and not a single host came to address my inquiry. From the moment we tried to board until the very end, there wasn't a single rep I could give a shout out to. The attitude was aggressive and arrogant. A little mindfulness goes a long way and the staff in my opinion need to significantly up their game. The job isn't merely to serve food on the plane but to make sure all travellers are respected and responded to with basic kindness.  Of course this is just my one such experience there may have been others out there who've had a pleasant experience with this airline.	0
Ho Chi Minh to Tel Aviv via Moscow. I ordered a special meal and on the first flight I got my meal but on the connection I was told that the meal was only booked for the first leg of the flight, which was obviously a mistake by the airline. When I landed I spoke to Aeroflot again to make sure that on the return flight everything is registered correctly and that I am registered to have a special meal, they assured me that they would verify this. 1 day before the flight I called to speak to them again and the woman I spoke to was rude, said I had not ordered a kosher meal and that they cannot fix it even though they have much time until the flight, which I will take tomorrow.	0
Vancouver to Merida via Mexico City. Worst experience ever. Worst airline ever. Worst customer service ever. I had to rearrange my return flight with a different low-cost airline and the experience was way better. I have never felt so disregarded by an airline before in my life, they didn't show the slightest intention to help me at any time. I guess they just don't care about average people, just hi-end business travellers. I'll never use Aeromexico again, not even if they give me the tickets for free.	0
Mexico City to Salt Lake City. This is easily the worst airline experience I've ever had. I had a problem with my departure date and needed to switch it for another day, and not only did they not help me switch it but said it would be impossible to change my flight and refused to give me any kind of refund. I will never use this airline again.	0
Leeds to Boston via Dublin. Due to weather, other airlines made changes to itineraries but Aer Lingus published the flight as being on time. They never provided any updates and said there was no one available to help. The display boards in the Leeds airport said “update at 12:00” then “update at 12:30” then “update at 12:50” then finally after 1:00 the boards displayed “report to gate #“ We reported to the specified gate number to find complete confusion. After standing there for some time with no information, someone from Aer Lingus appeared and said we were being put on a bus to the Manchester airport. It took some time to get everyone loaded onto the bus then the same Aer Lingus person came to the front of the bus and made an announcement. The Aer Lingus person told us an airplane was waiting at the Manchester airport to take us to Dublin and said an Aer Lingus person would meet us at the bus upon arrival in Manchester and escort us. She also asked us to each call Aer Lingus at +353 1 761 7844 to get re-booked on the Dublin to Boston part of the trip. She added that if we couldn’t fly on to Dublin on Sunday that we would be put up in a hotel. It took about 80 minutes for an Aer Lingus representative to answer. A man finally came on the line and said he had no idea what I was talking about and he said he was sitting in New York and wasn’t sure how he could help. He did confirm that there was no way an airplane was waiting for us in Manchester and he finally booked us on a Dublin to Boston flight for Monday. We arrived in Manchester after a long bus ride to a complete customer service disaster. There was no one there to meet us as we got off the bus to escort us as promised. We weren’t sure what to do so we made our way to the Aer Lingus desk where they didn’t have a clue what was going on. They told us to use our original Aer Lingus boarding passes to get through security obviously, after trying several times we realized that was impossible. We had to go back to the Aer Lingus desk and after another long wait, we were finally booked from Manchester to Dublin. When we arrived in Dublin, there was no one there to help us as promised. After a number of inquiries, we were told there’s an Aer Lingus customer service desk in the baggage claim area. We made our way to the Aer Lingus desk and again no one knew what we were talking about and no one had a clue how to help us, even though we were told this had all been sorted out. An Aer Lingus man didn’t know what to do so he called the Carlton Hotel and over the phone arranged for us to spend the night there. We took the shuttle and arrived at the hotel for the night. This ordeal took 14 hours with Aer Lingus lying multiple times along the way - totally unacceptable customer service, not to mention lost wages and the extreme anxiety their lies caused.	0
Seattle to Birmingham via Dublin . I booked a three-segment flight to Birmingham, UK, following the route SLC to SEA, SEA to DUB, DUB to BHX. The first segment was an Alaskan Airlines codeshare. I go to the Alaska Airlines counter at Salt Lake and check-in, as I could not check-in online due to the international segments. They check my luggage through to Birmingham, and tell me to print off my Aer Lingus boarding passes in Seattle. No big deal, I think. That's not an uncommon issue with codeshares. I land at Seattle, 6 hours in advance of my next flight's departure. I exit security and make my way to the Aer Lingus ticket counter. Which, as it turns out, isn't staffed. No problem! I think (foolishly). I'll just check in at a kiosk. Oddly enough, kiosk returns "Flight is not open for check-in." Okay, fine I go to check-in online. But my record locator isn't working, so I call customer service. I inform them I can't print my boarding passes. They give me a record locator and tell me to try checking in online. I try, and the "Reprint boarding passes" button is greyed out. Let's try the mobile app - nope, "No issuing boarding passes" error is returned. I call customer service again. Unapologetically, they tell me to just wait until they start staffing their single ticket counter at Seattle. They also tell me to try calling my travel agency (AmEx Global Travel, in this case, who I'd booked through). I call AmEx. They apologetically explain that they don't even have an agency dial-in to Aer Lingus they can call Aer Lingus but will get the same runaround as I did. The AmEx agents are always good people. Fine. I decide to chat with an Alaskan rep, who is friendly and tells me "Yeah, Aer Lingus has a tendency to annoy a lot of travelers with their customer service approach." This is 2019. "Printing boarding passes" is sort of a fundamental thing. The second rep I talked to on the phone told me "We're going paperless," which would be great if literally any of their IT toolkits worked properly. The agents didn't know when the kiosks would be available for check-in. Nor could agents release the flight for me to check in again, or authorize re-fetching my boarding passes, or email them to me, or send them via SMS, or authorize their access with their mobile app. If you look at Google Reviews, you'll see that Aer Lingus has a well-deserved 1.2 stars out of 5 at SEATAC. I won't fly Aer Lingus again. Basic customer service can't and shouldn't really be ignored - due to them, I spent 3 hours sitting outside the security zone at SEATAC because none of their agents were either trained or had permission to actually distribute boarding passes. This is senseless, and moreover *easily corrected.* This is not complex work, and not something any other transatlantic carrier operating in North America has issues with. 0/10. Failures happen. I'm not going to judge an airline by its errors, but by how it attempts to remedy them, which in this case, appears to be a determined course of calculated indifference.	0
Toronto to Honolulu. I was threatened of cancellation 3 times and had to re-purchase my ticket each time thanks to some flawed algorithm the airline uses. I received emails stating that it was potentially a fraudulent purchase, and I needed to come to the airline in person to show ID, otherwise, I would be cancelled within 48 hours prior to travel. I was not refunded any money either, just informed of this. Because I was traveling with a young child and a party of 4 others, I had no choice (otherwise I'd have bought another ticket with a different airline). I drove 2 hours out of my way in order to do this, and when I got to the airport the Air Canada representative told me I had to repurchase the tickets. I told him I was not refunded, and he insisted that "the money was on its way." This was 3 weeks ago, so essentially I paid double for my tickets and had to drive way out of my way in inclement weather to do so. This is the worst airline ever - unethical, irresponsible, and fraudulent.	0
The comments about this airline mostly relate to their international flights and I understand that they offer a good service there. It's a different story on their internal and regional flights. I booked on-line for the short hop return from Bishkek to Almaty. It seemed like a good idea at the time but proved to be a disaster. The airline changed their schedule without informing me their records apparently said that they had "tried to contact me" - I'm not even sure how. I turned up at the airport and waited for 5 hours assuming that it had simply been delayed for that time only to find out that they had moved me not to that flight but to one 20 hours earlier. The Air Astana agent acted as though he hadn't seen an e-ticket before claimed I hadn't paid for the outward journey or maybe hadn't paid at all - really any excuse to not allow me onto the plane. I had no alternative but to go back to Bishkek and travel overland the next day - all at my own expense of course. The return flight had been similarly moved but a local agent helped me out to properly arrange that one and got a refund for the outward journey. I complained to Air Astana as my non-arrival had seriously thrown out the plans of my hosts in Almaty not just mine. No answer. I complained again only to receive a fob off reply that they regretted this but they weren't going to do anything further about it and hoped that I would fly with them again: I doubt that very much. I've given 1 rather than 0 as the Almaty to Bishkek "return" flight itself wasn't bad. Their ground service and support in these regional centres very much needs to upgraded to the same standard as their flight experience.	0
Aeromexico is, quite simply, as a flagship carrier, a downright embarrassment. Customer service is nil. The product is more like a low cost airline at best. To be avoided if you can.	0
Cancun to Austin via Mexico City. Awful customer service and corrupt policies. I was told my round trip flight would not be cancelled even though I missed my departure flight. So I got a one way ticket to my destination and expected to use the return flight. No, they cancelled my trip. I will not recommend this to anyone nor use it in the future.	0
Athens to Paris. Quite rude security check after passport control when boarding starts. One manager asked to take my passport without any greeting and was looking at me for 20 seconds and then just got back my passport without saying a word. It was a feeling like I’m a second class citizen maybe because I have Russian passport.	0
Toronto to London via Dublin. Tried to change my ticket the morning before my flight (added an extra 3 hours of layover). I managed to change it back thankfully. Delayed on the runway for an hour in Dublin, lost my checked bags. Customer service was useless, I had to call in 2 or 3 times a day until my bags were returned to have them fix the descriptions of the missing bags (completely lacked any form of common sense - listed all my bags as golf bag at one point?). Finally delivered all my bags three days later, and broke my expensive hiking backpack. I submitted my receipts a month ago and I have heard nothing from customer service about my reimbursement for interim expenses & backpack repairs (have ignored four emails now, I've only been able to make one phone call due to the time difference & international calling fees) Losing all my luggage & struggling with customer service to get it back completely ruined my trip. With so much of my gear & hiking bag missing, I wasn't able to do most of the excursions I had planned, and had to spend a good deal of time waiting around for my bags to be delivered. I understand that everyone is human, and mistakes happen during busy travel seasons, but this is over the top.  I asked for the fee I paid to check my bag back (as well as reimbursement for the perishable goods that expired while my bags were missing), and they declined that as well as any other remedial gesture for their lack of competency. I went with Aer Lingus because the ticket was a little less expensive, and I don't mind a layover, but I know to never fly with this airline. It's not worth the $50 saved. Total mess.	0
Flights with Air Berlin can be like night and day. Flights from JFK to KRK via Berlin/TXL were pleasantly uneventful; ie. decent food and friendly service. Flight back to JFK from TXL was the voyage of the damned. Check-in at WAW took forever, and as TXL has no airside transfer facilities, had to check-in again in Berlin, though I hadn't needed to do that on the outbound flight. The food was inedible on the TXL to JFK leg. They seemed to have forgotten to restock the inflight duty-free, so practically nothing was available. FAs went out of their way to be nasty - every time I wanted a drink I had to ask 3-4 times before finally getting one; a nearby passenger who asked for a whiskey got the phrase "I only have coke" barked at him as the FA walked by never to return. 	0
I took my flight from New York to Bombay via Beijing. First the flight got delayed for 1.5 hour at JFK airport then it got delayed at Beijing airport for another 4 hours, when plane was on runway at Beijing airport the it stopped there and took a halt for 2 hours and they stated the reason that there is no fuel in the plane. This is very negligent on a part of international airline that they didn't check for fuel when waited for 2-3 hours, its like keeping the life of customer at risk. When I reached Mumbai Airport, I didn't got my baggage there and airline employee informed me that my baggage is at Beijing airport, they forgot to transfer my bag to the connecting flight. I got my bags after 4 days at my home with items missing from my bag. Air China's customer service is very bad and they take no responsibility for their customer's safety and product security. I have contacted them several time but got no proper response, it is very irresponsible behavior.  Air China is taking no responsibility to help me find my items or compensate me for the loss. Even during flight when I asked for water, they told me they are out of disposal glass which is very bad on part of service the airline is providing. Worst service for safety and security.	0
Shanghai to Jakarta via Beijing. This is the worst flight ever!  I have a bad stop over condition with 1.5hrs time ti change the flight from domestic flight to international flight. It is a combination of huge airport not clear signage short time to change the plane and so tight security checking made me arrive in the gate 10 mins prior to departing. Which i didnt found any ground officer there was one lady inside the isle and notice with my appearance but apparently she didnt open the glass gate for me. I contacted one of friend who were able to enter the plane in order to inform the staff to let me in without any result. The process to get to international counter wasnt easy as well. I have to ask several times till finally arrived to the counter which located in domestic terminal. No solution given and the lady was insisted of saying the airlines was able to replace my ticket with same same route for another two days because Air China doesnt have daily flight to Jakarta. It was suck!! Since air china wasnt able to compensate me with the accomodation since i have to stay for another two days cant refund my ticket cant give me rerouting ticket cant give me another ticket from its affiliates and i have to book another ticket myself if i want to catch up the earliest flight to my country. The staff also didnt communicate well because apparently my baggage was being taken out from the plane. Later i found out from my friend that the flight got delayed for more than one hour for the sake of taking out my luggage. Still dont understand why Air China sells ticket with short time for stopover if the condition is not supported. Later I read in Beijing capital terminal mentioned that at min should have 2 hours stop over to process with all those checkins and moving from one to other terminals.	0
I have flown this segment (TOR-Victoria) a number of times. I used to commute Toronto to London, UK and typically paid less for that flight segment (even buying less than a week’s notice). This Rouge plane isn’t fit for purpose: seats are falling apart, no legroom, no food (5 hour flight?), no screens, we bus out to the tarmac from AC’s hub at Pearson, the plane never leaves on time - the entire experience is borderline - criminal. I’d love to see ACs CEO saddle up for this experience in economy. The least he could do is put a proper plane/gate on the route.	0
Toronto to Barcelona. Purchasing the tickets was a complete nightmare. The website kept getting errors and I could not book the dates I wanted. Customer service helped me over the phone advised they apologized and because of the Mishap they would place me in a better seat free of charge with extra legroom. I am in the plane right now. If your guessing I don't have extra legroom you're right. I also never ended up getting the dates I wanted because the representative kept getting the same error as I got initially. Fast forward to the airport. Get on the plane,  no entertainment.  Pay for Wi-Fi or use their App is the entertainment. I went online, took out my gift card, and it turns out they don't accept their own gift card. Whatever, I pay. They bring the food that is included. It's not good at all.  I wait for someone to come to ask if I want anything else. No one for about and hour and a half. So I press the service button on the elbow rest. No one came for another roughly 20 minutes. I get up and walk all to the back of plane and ask for Their meal combo. Turns out they don't have combos on international flight.  They don't have any additional food on this flight except for chips. I buy anyway, because there's another 5 hours left and I have a gift card... but they don't accept their own gift cards for food either. So it's basically useless now with the remaining balance.... How am I going to spend 120 remaining on a gift card if I can only use it for plane tickets? I only have 6 months to use it or lose it.	0
Flew London Heathrow to Beijing via Moscow. My only reason to write this review is to warn other Skyteam members not to fly with Aeroflot. From booking to flight, aside from the planes being relatively new and a lower price than the poor standard Chinese airlines there is no other reason to fly with them. Despite being a Platinum member I was unable to book any economy comfort seats nor even an exit seat, they are all blocked for Aeroflot members only - and on the London to Moscow leg all the exit seats were empty and we were not allowed to move to them. On the 9.5 hour Beijing leg there are no extra legroom seats as they are only available on the 777's, so you are on an aircraft that most airlines use on medium haul with only 30 inches legroom - the cabin was crammed with people all over the place and as normal rather large people at that with legs in the aisles. Check-in was supposed to start at 7.40 but we waited until 8am whilst listening to the staff stories about the night before whilst they drank their coffee, the start of abysmal service displayed throughout the entire journey. Flight left 1 hour late and then at Moscow was delayed again by 1.15 whilst they de-iced the wings. The food was not only poor it was inedible, and I had the same AVML meal on both legs plus no alcohol at all, and when questioned all I got was a curt "we never have any" reply. Why on earth not? There is no religious reason on flights to China and even China Eastern has 2 bottles of red and white. Lounges were typical Eastern European, absolutely packed and with no hot food whatsoever, I managed to find some coleslaw and sweet bread plus some Chilean wine to keep me going as I'd eaten nothing for over 6 hours. Entertainment system was zero on the flight from London, not even a communal TV nor any music, and on the Beijing flight it kept breaking down. At no time did any staff walk around with drinks, there are no snacks available not even noodles and if you press your call button they do not answer. I can only assume that the reason to travel with them is the price, it was a terrible experience from start to finish.	0
Cancun to Mexico City. Wooed by the promise of "more personal space, an exclusive in-flight menu, and preferential treatment", I chose to fly Aeromexico's business class on the popular Cancun-Mexico City route. Things started going downhill at check-in when I was told there was no lounge service, even though my terminal had a contract VIP lounge that could easily have been commissioned by Aeromexico. While it had been a very long time since I had flown business class with an airline that didn't offer a lounge service, I expected the on-board catering - which Aeromexico promised would be "premium hors d'oeuvres, drinks and in-flight menu" - would help make up for the disappointment. How wrong was I? I was appalled to learn that the nice lunch I was reasonably hoping for would consist of nuts and a selection of junk food like chocolate bars and potato crisps. After being completely misled by Aeromexico's advertising, I was left hungry by the time I arrived in Mexico City two and a half hours later and feeling as though I had been taken for a fool. If you're thinking of paying extra for Aeromexico's domestic business class offering, please avoid my mistake and don't bother.	0
As most of you already know, AeroMexico partners with Delta. So, we booked our trip to Mexico through Delta Vacations (that part went perfectly, as usual). We not only booked our flights but we chose to go with Aeromexico on the way back. Partially because it went through Mexico City and we had an overnight stay and it was an airline we had not flown with before. To put things in perspective, we have flown with several other Delta partners in the past and have had zero issues (matter of fact, they were great! KLM, Air France, etc.). So, we thought that this would be the same type of experience and of course a new adventure. We were so incredibly wrong! We booked our flights in mid-June for the beginning of October and our seating assignments and everything were set to go (they were first class seats). Two days before our flight we checked both Aeromexico and Delta and the Delta seating arrangement was correct (nothing had changed) but Aeromexico had moved our seats (on both flights) to the very front of the plane, which we do not like because there is no place to put your hand carry (personal) bags so you have to put them above. Since Aeromexico was for a trip back we were told after spending over an hour on the phone that they would not change our seats until 24 to 48 hours before. This was interesting to us because they had already changed our seating on both flights to the front of the plane (without any warning). From what we understand after speaking with our Delta representative (because Aeromexico was almost impossible to get in touch with) this had been the second change they made to our seating without advising us or even giving us the option to choose. So now sitting in Cancun, Mexico (wasting more of our vacation) 24 to 48 hours before our flight back, we checked Aeromexico. To our great surprise, they had not only moved us again but this time out of first class and into the main cabin, which would be fine if that’s what we had paid for. So again (while on vacation), we get on the phone and waste our time with Aeromexico. Then after no resolution or better said waiting on the phone (eternal hold). We called Delta again, this call took an hour and a half and the Delta Representative was told by Aeromexico (the first time he called) that they would change us to a different flight. Then, after 15 minutes of no changes the Delta representative called back and he was told that not only would they not change our flights but if we wanted our old seats back or a different flight that we would have to pay. Of course, we refused (Who in their right mind would hand over more money?). We asked the Delta representative what his response was to them and he said that he took it to their management and they also refused saying the same thing. What it appeared to us is that Aeromexico was trying to upcharge us for services we already purchased. This should be brought up to the Aeromexico corporate headquarters, and used as training and a teaching tool on how to not treat your customer. Because we fly so much with Delta and because we think they’re just a better airline, the Delta Vacations representative took us off of the Aeromexico flights and found us flights home on Delta (for no additional cost and the same day!). We would not and could not recommend Aeromexico to anyone at any time for anything. Moreover, we are actually shocked that they remain in business with these types of unethical practices and behaviors.	0
Cancun to Havana. I have tried to make contact with this business multiple times over the last month. This airline does not offer phone support other than for very basic assistance like sales. Everything else must be through email. However, my issue is they don't respond to their email. I asked for a tax to be refunded that I was never supposed to be charged as I was exempt from this tax, as well as a refund for a phone booking fee that I was not notified about until after the charge was completed. They responded to me that ¨everyone is notified about the phone charge, and that the tax would not be refunded¨. I replied on August 28th clarifying which tax I was referring to, I also asked them to review the call recording as they would hear that I inquired about the phone fee to be refunded while I was on the phone with the representative. The sales agent did not mention the fee. I inquired with him about the fee after seeing it on the receipt in my email. He told me the only way to receive a refund was to email the complaints department. This was during the sale, not in another interaction. Furthermore, I would have never made a phone reservation but their online booking system was having an issue and the error message told me I needed to call to complete the reservation. For this reason alone they should have refunded me that fee. However, I received no response to this email. I emailed again September 17th, to let them know that I was injured in an accident and would not be able to make the flight. I emailed them a medical certificate, and photos of my injuries, and I requested that they provide either a refund or a credit to be used on a future flight. They couldn't even be bothered to reply with a ¨no¨. Just no response at all. I later realized that my Visa Infinite card that I made the payment on came with trip insurance, so I filed a claim with my insurance company. My insurance company requested a letter from the airline stating that the trip was canceled. The airline did send this. However, after I submitted the letter to my insurance, my insurance company requested that the letter also include additional details. I requested a revision to the letter on September 23rd. However, once again, I received no response. Despite being routinely ignored by this business the only thing I am asking for is a document confirming 1. the cancellation of the flight, 2. the amounts reimbursed and the fines charged OR indicating that there will be no refund. Also, an apology for simply ignoring almost every communication with them would also be nice.	0
On 3rd October Aer Lingus cancelled my flight from Dublin to Verona (I discovered it at the airport since they sent a cancellation email less than 2 hrs before the flight). They said that it was because of the storm Lorenzo but I'm sure it was just an excuse. How is it possible that all the other flights that were going to Milan, Bologna, Venice etc., that are not far away as the cow flies from Verona, departed without any issue and mine didn't? Aer Lingus just didn't want to spend money for a flight with only 40 passengers so they cancelled it and, luckily for them, they also had the perfect excuse that day, the storm. I was supposed to fly out at 12.55 pm and instead I flew to Milan Malpensa at 07.30 pm because also that flight had an hour delay, and in Milan we arrived to Verona airport at 02.30 am by a coach organised by an Aer Lingus representative. After that I had an additional hour to reach my home. I arrived home at 03.30 am after I had been waiting at Dublin airport since 11.00 am of the previous day. A trip that should have lasted maximum 8 hours took actually 17.5 hours and bevause of that I got sick during my holidays and now I'm back at work still sick. I have filled out their form to receive a compensation for this awful experience and they denied it! And in the email they also expect me to book with them again? I hope they are kidding! Their company and their behavior is just disgraceful, I'm never ever going to book with them in my life again.	0
Aer Lingus is a very poorly run airline. They encourage you to book your domestic and international travel through their website and then leave you to the wolves for your domestic travel. I booked a flight for work from Nashville, TN to Shannon, IR. Aer Lingus stated that I would be able to select my domestic travel seats directly with Jetblue. After booking I discovered that I cannot book a seat with Jetblue until 24 hours before the flight since I booked through a 3rd party (as in Aer Lingus). Also learned there were only middle seats left and I was out of luck. When I called Aer Lingus's US reservation center I was greeted by two very rude agents who treated me like I was disturbing their day. They informed me that they were unwilling to do anything to help. When I requested to cancel my domestic travel they said I would loose the entire fare and only get the government fees back. When I asked to talk to a supervisor they told me that were all busy and would call me back, never got the call! I encourage every international traveler to seek any other airline than Aer Lingus. They do not put their customers first and it shows!	0
Budapest to Tokyo via Beijing. Worst service ever. We were 4 hours late to Tokyo and we arrived at midnight, when there are no mass transportation. We had to take a night taxi for a lot of extra charge in order to get to our hotels. The stewardesses are not friendly either except if you're Chinese. And on top of that, our luggage got lost on our way home. I do NOT recommend this airline to anyone. Just save up more money and travel with a better one.	0
London to Phuket via Chengdu. Awful. If you can, book with someone else. All the flights were late, the food is horrible and it did not change in the entire flight (rice and chicken 24/7). But the main thing for me was that on my return, I got the dates wrong and i turned up a day late to my flight. This wad entirely my fault, but no one in the company could offer me a solution and they made me call their call centre in china, where they put me on hold for more than 20min (international call-imagine the cost). The staff was really rude, picked up the phone and said they would not put me in another flight (even though the woman at the check in desk told me there was a lot of space in the next one) and they wanted to charge me around 1000€. In the end I had to book another one with Singapore Airlines, faster and only 550€. Even though it was my fault to miss it, i know this happened to a few people and their company placed them on the next flight free of charge or for a fee.	0
Toronto to Honolulu. Do not use this airline. They cancelled me 3 times, sending me an email saying it had to do with "fraud alert" and that I had to purchase the ticket in person at an Air Canada kiosk, which is 2.5 hours from my home. I repurchased the ticket with another credit card, even though the former was fine and it should have gone through, and 3 days later it happened again. I will never fly with Air Canada rouge again.	0
Toronto to Miami. My wife and I had 1 backpack carry amongst the two of us. We were asked to remove it from overhead storage and put it under our seats. I had shoes and towels stored in the backup making it bulky. I could not sit comfortably throughout the flight. When quizzed as to why other travellers with large and heavy carryons were given first priority - the attendant said that was just the case. It is brutal that we were penalized for choosing to pack lightly. Furthermore, we have seen multiple smaller backups and handbags stored in the same bins. I cannot say why our bag was removed. Atrocious!	0
Toronto to Orlando. I tried to checkin today for my wife and I and found out that they had put us in separate rows even though we booked these tickets 3 months ago. I called and they wouldn’t move us even though there were two emergency seats open. This occurred after they notified us 2 months ago that our flight home was cancelled and we had to choose a different flight. No apologies, no solutions, no customer service, just the arrogance of Air Canada.	0
Stockholm to Los Angeles via Moscow. I had a confirmed ticket but Aeroflot refused to issue me a boarding pass SVO-LAX claiming the information was wrong in their reservation system. Logically they should fix what is wrong on their system. Aeroflot Customer Service "Sorry we can't help you, you will have to buy a new ticket."  Delta was nice enough to fix Aeroflot's dysfunction and get me on the flight. The flight SVO-LAX was delayed for two hours because they were waiting for transit passengers. On a 14 hour flight the IFE did not work for the duration of the flight. They lost my baggage and delivered it 3 days later. Then they kept sending several emails asking question when I claimed reimbursement and to this date I have yet to see a single rouble! I don't mind Aeroflot employees' stony unsmiling demeanor but the lack of service is a dealbreaker.	0
I am very disappointed with Areomexico and this review is based on my last experience with this airline. I had a reservation for my mom, unfortunately she had a medical emergency and needed a gallbladder surgery, when I contacted Aeromexico about this to re-schedule the trip, they told me that I had to pay U$200 dollars to change the date and U$150 because not shown, also that I have to pay the difference in price if there was any because the new dates, we did not have insurance and that is how the company works, the only way they will give the money back is if she would’ve passed away, surgeries and other emergencies are not applicable and you have to pay. I must mention we did not want any money back, just travel date updates. The communication was all over email, there is no way you can talk to anyone from customer service, just people from sales department. Long story short I accepted to pay the U$350 and started looking into new dates and prices on their website, after my research I found out that the new price was U$771.48, this price is from Aeromexico website, so I decided to give call and book / re-schedule the trip with the new dates. At the time of my call the agent confirmed the price I got from their website but after telling them that I was just going to re-schedule and gave him my old reservation number they told me that the prices on their website which is the same price he gave me did not apply to me anymore, the customer service representative said that new tickets prices are different than change of date rates, and I had to pay U$879 for the change of date, U$350 fine and U$529 because the difference in prices, keep in mind on their website a new ticket is U$720 and I originally paid U$1024. Also, I am buying the same destination, same economy seats, same hours, just a different dates and paying the finds and difference in price is there is any, the same agent confirmed that in my case was better to buy a new ticket with the new days than re-scheduling the fly, can you guys believe this? What kind of customer service is this? I won’t recommend this airline anymore it is ridiculous the way the treat their clients. At the end was cheaper to buy a new ticket than changing the dates.	0
I flew on Aegean from Athens to Cairo, a direct flight and when I arrived in Cairo I received a text informing me that my bag did not arrive in Cairo with me. When I checked my bag that morning 2.5 hours before my flight was scheduled to depart, the rude airline employee put my bag on the conveyor belt after tagging it. The belt stopped and reversed, the bag came back, and I asked the Aegean rep. why. She said without looking at me, "It's overweight! Take it go over there!" and then she ignored me. I said, "I just flew yesterday with your airline and the bag weighed 20.3 kg and there is nothing new in it." She kept ignoring me so I went to a different line, where I waited for 30 minutes to be told my bag was not overweight and indeed did weigh 20.3 kg. In Cairo, when I found out my bag had not arrived, I saw that most of the other passengers on my flight had not gotten theirs either. In fact, I later learned that Aegean Airlines had misplaced or lost the luggage of passengers of five different flights in two days! I had to fill out a form and get a complaint number. I expected to hear from the airline that day telling me they had located my bag, but that didn't happen. The next day I got a message from WorldTracer, a luggage tracing service, that my bag had been located "pending confirmation." For an entire week that message remained on the site. I had one email from Aegean Airlines customer service department informing me the day after my flight that my bag had been located and was being flown to Cairo but that proved not to be true. I emailed and called Aegean Airlines and never got a straight answer about where my bag was. I got emails that told me to "rest assured" that they were doing everything they could to resolve the problem. They never returned my calls and only repeated information about being reimbursed for "first needs" for up to 40 euros per day. The list of information they needed to approve reimbursement was ridiculously long. Finally, a week later and only minutes after speaking with another Aegean Airlines customer services rep. and being told they didn't know the whereabouts of my luggage but were doing everything they could to find it, I got an email from the lost luggage office in Cairo airport telling me my bag had been delivered there and I could pick it up. It cost me two taxi rides and five hours to retrieve my bag from the airport. I spent a week not knowing if I'd ever see my belongings again. Deeply regrettably, I still have one flight ahead of me with this terrible airline and I dread turning over my belongings to them. When I asked them for an upgrade for that flight, they told me they weren't able to do that. I'm sorry I can't change my flight.	0
Terrible! Absolutely terrible! Do not fly this airline. They're extremely rude, spoke down to both my wife and I, did nothing to fix the fact they were late upon arrival which made me miss my connection flight so I had to pay out of pocket a crazy amount of money for a hotel and taxis. The manager at Newark airport has no idea how to perform a good guest experience. And all you get when you try to contact their customer is service is "we're very sorry." That does nothing for me and my scenario. Do yourself a favor and fly any other airline you can no matter how much more it costs, I promise you'll be better off. Aer Lingus is the absolute worst airline I've ever flown with.	0
Zurich to Los Angeles via Dublin. It was the worst airline experience I've ever had. 1. Rip off during online check-in. They make you pay for a regular tourist class seat. I had to pay 65USD just for having a seat 2. Extremely poor, outdated and non-functional entertainment system. 3. Very unfriendly cabin crew 4. Very dirty cabin and toilets 5. Greasy, non-tasty meals 6. Wifi not working 7. Uncomfortably cold cabin temperature. Everyone was wearing jackets and hoods. No blankets available. Overall experience: This airline is overwhelmed by its operation. It feels like they don't know what they're doing.	0
Dublin to Seattle. My luggage was lost on Aer Lingus flight 143 to SEA on 9/26/19 - the reps at the carousel were clueless, they had no access to know if baggage was delayed, they could barely fill out the claims forms (which were very poor copies of an original so faint as to be unreadable). We waited almost an hour after bags starting arriving for them to confirm no more bags remained. I was given no reference # and they said someone would contact me in 2 hrs with the status of my luggage. No one ever called. I called back 5 hrs after the flight landed using the number on the claims form  - it was a off-shore call center (as confirmed later by a rep) but Aer Lingus waas not listed as one of the airlines for service - I used one of the other choices and the rep said they could help - now, 3 hrs after filling the claim i was told they had no record of the luggage and even though it was not in their system, it would arrive on the next day's flight. Next day, 3 hrs after that flight arrived I called again, and was again told they had no info - the rep this time told me in might have been delayed because the plane was "full" put me on hold while he 'contacted the airline. when he came back he said they had no further information - after additional questioning he admitted he had not actually contacted anyone and had no information confirming even the current location of my bag. 3 hrs later i called and was told the luggage didnt arrive but would be on Sunday's flight since they had no flights on the 28th. I asked why they didnt send it on another airline and was told that was not possible. I called again sunday night, 9/29 and the rep said my luggage had been 'expedited' but again he couldn't tell me whether it was on that flight or even where it was. Then he told me it had been scheduled to arrive either 9/27 or 9/28 on another airline - but he could not tell me what airline that was!	0
Düsseldorf to Miami on Air Berlin, an unfriendly crew, giving not the asked service and starting disussing if it is worse to serve - by the way we are Gold Card Member. This is after more than 40 years flying many airlines in first and business class the worst experience we ever had. After return from our trip we wrote a letter to AirBerlin and got the anwer, that they are very sorry - thats it.	0
Los Angeles to Hangzhou via Beijing. Worst travel experience in my life. I was traveling with ac from Los Angeles via Beijing to Hangzhou on April 2nd. The plain landed 15 min late which was not so bad considering the flight was 13 hours long. I missed my connecting flight to Hanghzou due to tight flight connections, disorganization of the Air line and the customs and crew. We never got the entry card on the plane, so 200 people were trying to get the card, find a pen and the space where to fill out the card. At the same time airport staff barely speak English, but they are great in "sign" language. Anything you ask they just use their hands to direct you to go left, right, back or straight. Truly sad. I was directed along with a another passenger to the wrong gate c10 , instead of c4 that directly led to miss my flight literally within 5 min. I needed to go back to the main terminal and change my ticket. I was issued a ticket for next morning and offered hotel stay. When I got to the dingy hotel I was told if I dont want to share the room with another person I will have to pay 200 yuan.  Yes, I end up paying for the hotel! On my way back from Hangzhou to Beijing my flight was delayed 1 hour and 30 min because of "air traffic control". We landed at 2:10. I was running, thru the airport, from domestic to international department, and despite my own belief I managed to get to the gate Lady told me that my ticked was erased and she can not do anything. I needed to go back to change my ticket for the next flight which was 6 hours later, and even this flight was delayed for another 90 min, due to Again "air traffic control" . Thank you For making my trip so miserable. I will make sure to spread the word everywhere I go to let everyone how bad the experience was, and aware travelers to stay away from this airline company.	0
Frankfurt to Bangkok via Beijing. We missed our last flight (Bangkok to Phuket) because the flight from Beijing to Bangkok departed 2.5 hours late. We should have arrived at 18.35 but we arrived at 21.00. We didn’t get refund for the flight we missed and the hotel although it wasn’t our fault.	0
I will write this review as honest, and fairly as I possibly can. By far, Air Canada Rouge is the worst airline I have flown in years. Even compared to other countries ultra budget airlines, AC Rouge sets the standard for negligence and incompetence. I will elaborate, on a beautiful October day, flight from Toronto to Calgary was originally scheduled to leave at 12.30pm ET. It left well over 2.5 hours later. The first aircraft at the gate was delayed by 30 mins due to "technical issues", which turned out to be caused by the baggage compartment doors being stuck. Only after an additional 30 minutes, did they move folks over to an adjacent gate, and different aircraft. Once the people from that flight had all disembarked, including the flight crew (which took about 20 minutes), we all waited another 30 minutes in line while some of the staff were scrambling to switch folks over, and others were standing around doing nothing or talking on their cell phones. Once everyone was on board and settled in, the Captain announced over the intercom that it would be yet another 40 minutes until catering arrived and stocked the aircraft! The seats being cramped and uncomfortable is to be expected. No points there either. Absolutely asinine. For Pete's sake this is a subsidiary of Air Canada, I expected more, and was thoroughly let down. I will avoid them in the future like the plague.	0
Absolutely the worst airline out there. Terrible seat, extremely uncomfortable, rude and unfriendly staff. No snack or screen on a 4 hour flight. They charged us 35$ for checking out one bag on the way to Punta Cana and 35$ again on the way back. They lost our luggage with our home key, car key and all our medications. Nobody accepts the responsibility. They are extremely rude and cheap. The worst airline out there. Stay away! I will never travel with Air Canada again and will never recommend it to anyone.	0
Las Vegas to Toronto. Air Canada is pretty much a disgrace to the Canadian image and the maple leaf. It seriously needs to revamp it's customer experience/service strategy, as well as upgrade a majority of its fleet. Most of the planes, especially those serving its own country and the US are from sometime in the early 90's it seems. Squeaky seats, fraying seatbelts, broken air vents, non-functional lavatories causing huge delays, loss of baggage are just a few examples. Rude staff on the phone and on the planes is another disconcerting issue. Let's pull up our socks, Air Canada, and represent the country the way it deserves to be.	0
Aeroflot is based in Russia where bad weather in winter is not uncommon and for pasengers to endure 12 hour delay overnight in Moscow airport due to weather conditions is unacceptable. The worst way of dealing with delayed passengers, offering them a 7EUR voucher for making them miss their correspondance. Overall very poor quality with no inflight entertainment from London to Moscow.	0
I flew with my 9 yr old son from Heathrow to Shanghai via Moscow. The flight from the London to Moscow had no inflight entertainment or power sockets, not great when flying with a 9yr old. The food was terrible and largely undedible. The staff were so rude. The flight from Moscow to Shanghai, the food again is terrible, the screen on my sons seat was broken, as was the remote control, my headphone socket was hanging off and only 1 ear produced sound. Then on the return journey, broken headphone sockets on both my sons and my seats, bad food and rude staff. The connecting flight from moscow to London had a very old TV system, but again no power and my sons headphone socket produced no sound. Unbeliably bad, especially in this day and age. I purchased this flight after reading reviews that they had significantly improved the flights and service over the years. Dont believe it, but they are as awful as ever.	0
Toronto to San Jose via Mexico City. I had packed a carry on bag, only for the airline to force me to stow it. Upon my arrival to Costa Rica, I noticed my camera bag was gone.  So contacted them via email and telephone only to have no return and then placed on hold for an hour+ only to be hung up on. Clearly they have an issue with the trustworthiness of staff. If you value your belonging, reconsider flying with this airline. The flight there was fairly decent. The return flight airplane was extremely dated and in need of repair.	0
Panama City to New York via Mexico City. I have been to Mexico maybe 6 times in the last two years, including last week. This is the first time the airport crew took my passport in an envelope and kept it with them and won’t give it back until I reach Mexico. The reason being that my passport is from India and they want to understand my business in Mexico, my business is that I am returning home to New York through this pathetic excuse for an airline and I am legally allowed to walk into Mexico as I hold visas from UK, USA and Canada - never again AeroMexico! Once I got to Mexico, I was escorted into a holding room where they had 15 or so people who were in transit without legal grounds in Mexico. I had to show my documents to the officers in the holding room for the airline crew to realize they were wrong to do this. No apologies or nothing, the crew member just said she doesn’t know why “the people” in Panama did that. This was the longest 30 minutes of my life, I managed to take a photo without any of the officers noticing me. You can’t hold me hostage ever again Aer Mexico, no thanks!	0
Antwerp to Toronto via Dublin. Aer Lingus had a problem with the plane on the departure from Antwerp. Rather than ensure that connecting passengers to North America had some assurances that every effort would be made to access a connecting flight, they went silent. And they stayed silent after the email that advised us the plane was finally flown in from Dublin about 2 hours late. Aer Lingus has no portal on their web site that allows anything other than purchase, upgrades and changes to existing flights. They have no service agents available online or by telephone. If you call they will loop you through various options but when you choose a service agent they just start you in the loop again. The cabin staff will not discuss these matters and assure you that you will be dealt with in Dublin. In Dublin the staff just advise you to book a new flight after you are required to retrieve your baggage and not directed to any possible service centre other that one for those wishing to purchase tickets. So after a couple of hours of wasted time, you finally have to force an agent to assist you and she really just wants to book you sometime in the future and give you a hotel credit. And getting there is up to you. The problem with Aer Lingus is that they have no service options online or via telephone and the staff at Dublin is set up to sell tickets, not service victimized customers. I will never fly this airline again. They are a regional carrier that is trying to present itself as a real international carrier. Even now, 6 days after we landed back in Canada, they have not responded to any of our concerns. There is no one to do that.	0
Hangzhou to Johannesburg via Shenzhen. I had the worst experience ever using this flight Air China.I had extra kgs of my luggage which I was suppose to pay for. They told me to pay the amount which was double the actual money that I was suppose to pay. These guys they don't understand at all. I spend about 2 hours talking with them that this amount is too much, you might be doing a mistake. I ended up left my suitcase because I did not have that huge amount they wanted me to pay. When I was now in Shenzhen I asked the other Air China staff the amount I should pay for much kgs and they told me the correct amount but it was now too late because I had left the suitcase in Hangzhou airport. I am very disappointed with this airline and I will never took it again. Now my suitcase is still in China and I am going to incur extra expense to ship it to my country. Also they do not give enough food as compared to other airlines. Air China just give two meals for the whole journey from Shenzhen to Johannesburg. I don't advise anyone to use this airline.	0
Took 4 flights recently on a return trip to Japan. Booked 10 months advanced and requested vegetarian food. First on two flights they had no record of our request. I ended up eating 3 bread rolls as they had nothing else. On the 3rd flight coming home, they somehow had remembered and provided a veggie meal (which was the same as the normal meal, but no meat. Just plain rice!). By this point I had given up hope. Low and behold, the 4th flight was no vegetarian food. How they can let this happen is beyond me, not because of me being a vegetarian, but what happens to those with nut allergies or something? Also, the aircraft's were awful. The final leg home from Beijing to London, we were ferried out into the middle of Beijing airfield, where a lone aeroplane stood, looking very dirty and unused. This plane was from around 1999, with old TV sets, practically no leg room, and uncomfortable seats. Hands down the hardest flight I've had to endure. Will pay more next time and fly with a company like Singapore.	0
Toronto to Panama City. A 5 hour flight in an aircraft designed for domestic flights. No room for the legs, no food (not even a cracker), 2 glasses of tap water, a crowded and warm plane and no entertainment system. They lost my sleeping bag and refuse to take the claim at the airport.	0
I flew Air Canada Rouge (booked by our Travel Agent, we saw Air Canada and thought 'great' we didn’t realise that they were their budget fleet) for three flights in September 2019 from Manchester to Toronto and Calgary and then Vancouver back to Manchester. I was with my husband and his parents. All three flights were delayed leaving: First Flight: two and a quarter hours delay taking off because of a fuel light fault (this should have been sorted before we boarded and sat there all that time - preventable) Second Flight: an hour late leaving owing to a staff shortage for that flight (this should have been sorted out before we boarded - preventable) Third Flight: 15 minutes late leaving because of a late boarding passenger (not really Rouges fault). On our first flight, the delay in leaving almost caused us to miss our connection in Toronto. We managed to make it to our connecting plane Boarding Passes in hand, only to be told we had been removed (our seats undoubtedly re-sold). After much dithering, the staff managed to re assign us. However, our luggage didn’t make the flight as Rouge had decided to put it on a later flight (ours and lots of other peoples) but didn’t think to tell us, so we waited ages at the carousel the other end unnecessarily. Eventually and after much anxiety on our part it all arrived at our hotel in the middle of the night. My husband and I were in Premium Economy. The seats were extremely hard and uncomfortable. Seatbelts were short with not much room to slacken. The legroom was fine, but you couldn’t stretch out as there was a large mounting bracket beneath the seat in front. The overhead bins were minuscule. The iPads we were given to entertain us on the return flight wouldn’t connect properly, saying there was an error. We couldn’t be bothered to report it as we were so tired. It looked like everyone else’s was the same. The food was just ok and nothing special. Air stewards on all flights were friendly enough, but did seem disinterested. My in-laws were in Economy and experienced all of the above, except smaller seats and no in-flight entertainment. Unfortunately, their seats weren’t clean either, attached is a picture of the gap in my mother-in-laws footwell, it was absolutely filthy and there appeared to be months of old litter and food debris. Unfortunately, as a whole Air Canada Rouge was pretty poor and it’s highly unlikely that we will ever use them again, or recommend them to anyone.	0
Toronto to Edmonton. This is the worst airline I have ever flown, the staff were so very rude. They have you squashed in there like sardines, you cannot move, you are constantly bumping the seat in front of you, as is the person sitting behind you. The seats, if you could call them that was like sitting on concrete, you literally had to crawl over the armrest to get out of your seat as there is no leg room at all. I have never been so uncomfortable in my entire life. The staff were horrible and when coming around with the beverage cart, they kept skipping rows and not bothering to ask people if they wanted anything. No in-flight entertainment at all, not even a place to plug in your headphones to at the very least listen to music. This airline is a joke if you ever see Air Canada rouge come up, stay far away. I tried to opt-out of giving any star ratings at all because they truly deserve nothing, but it would not allow me to submit otherwise.	0
Guadalajara to Chicago O-Hare. Do not recommend this airline. Do not understand how paying extra for priority seating gets you last on the plane. Also having your carry on baggage removed and taken down with all the other luggage just because the flight did not have enough space. Makes no sense that I paid extra money and for the staff to be rude and not find a spot to put my luggage at and just take it out and give it to a person to put down not acceptable. Do not recommend this airline what so ever. Worst flight ever. Not worth it.	0
Boston to Faro via Dublin. Aer lingus gave me the worst travel experience I've ever seen in over 30 years of frequent flying. tldr: Last minute flight cancellation, no reroute options, rude and slow customer service and non transparent and misguiding compensation and refund policy. Details: I booked a flight from Seattle to Faro connecting in Boston and Dublin to attend a wedding. The flight was supposed to land in Terminal 2 at 7 AM which as per the Irish department of justice website will not require entry into Ireland. "Unless your arrival flight and onward connecting flight is in Terminal 2 between the hours of 0400 and 1600, you will need to go landside to make your onward connecting flight". First, my initial flight from Seattle was cancelled hours before departure. I accidentally checked my email before heading to the airport and found the notification. I called their customer support and was kept on hold for 90 mins, the customer service agent was rude and offered a reroute that arrives 2 days after my initial arrival date, which meant I will miss the main purpose of the trip and attend the wedding I am supposed to. When I asked him for an earlier option, he placed me on hold again and phone was disconnected after a min. I called again and waiting around 60 mins on hold again before I was automatically disconnected again. I called for a third time and finally got to an agent after almost 80 mins. She gave me another ticket that exchanged my 12 hour flight for a 24 hour flight with 10 hour wait in Boston. I accepted the offer since I had no other choice. Second: I did fly to Boston through a JetBlue flight and the agent did check me in and routed my luggage directly to Faro airport. I arrived in Boston and waited the 10 hours during which I checked in again with an aer lingus agent who checked my passport and gave me a boarding pass and explicitly marked "Visa OK" on it after asking me a number of time where my final destination is. At the gate, the agent asked all passengers to check in at the desk to confirm luggage. I did and he checked my passport and issued me a new boarding pass . An hour later, I was not allowed to board to the plane by the aer lingus agent as I don't have a transit visa to Dublin. I spent the next hours running from Jetblue agents to Aer lingus agents who exchanged blame in a rude and humiliating manner. Even calling Aer lingus support line didn't help. Eventually they offered to return me back to Seattle using my $1360 ticket. As a result, I missed my vacation and didn't attend my best friend's wedding, I lost the $1360 ticket and $2000 of hotel reservations, car rentals and other arrangements After almost one week, Aer lingus did not reply to my claim for refund or compensation, although the regulations mentioned on their website explicitly mention my right for compensation in case of one side cancellation.	0
Amsterdam to Cork. Although there was a huge queue for the passport control at Amsterdam Airport and had to spend 45 minutes in security lines, I managed to get to the gate 15 minutes before departure time, but the assistant didn't let me on board, as the door was already closed. They ruined my birthday weekend with my family. They refuse to give any refund, the customer service is not available during weekends and during weekdays after 20 minutes waiting time they hang up if they receive a complaint.	0
Los Angeles to Edinburgh via Dublin. Absolutely terrible customer service. My luggage was lost by Aer Lingus on 16/8/19 on the flight from Los Angeles to Edinburgh and despite chasing them up almost everyday I still do not have my luggage 11 days later! I keep getting promised a call back and nothing happens. Do not use them.	0
I am a oneworld Emerald for many years but made a huge mistake by changing from Air Berlin recently. Shanghai to Dusseldorf via Abu Dhabi, Shanghai to Dusseldorf leg was operated by Etihad Airways which was excellent. Upon arrival in AUH I was told that Air Berlin had a aircraft change due to technical problems. The new aircraft would only have Economy seats. That was the first time ever I booked a ticket where a Air Berlin business class is involved and then Air Berlin shows up all economy. Etihad offered me to rebook on AUH to MUC in Etihad business class and MUC to DUS on AB Eco. I obviously took that offer as I really think that no matter what happens, Air Berlin will always stay that "low cost" carrier in peoples minds because they dont really do something to improve that. I finally got confirmation for that theory once I got to the gate in MUC to board. Chaos, no priority boarding, unfriendly ground and onboard staff, narrow seats. What other points you need to be a real low cost carrier. Air Berlin please go check the big guys and learn how to treat your frequent travelers right! The rating here is strickly for Air Berlin.	0
New York JFK to Tokyo via Beijing. On February 16, 2019, I boarded an Air China flight from JFK to Beijing at 2:30 am. After departing, I noticed that my television at my seat (54J) was not working and informed the flight attendant. The flight attendant did a reset twice and also attempted to play a movie which failed. I also noticed that my headrest was also broken as it would not fold in. After speaking to the flight attendant, I was told to change to seat 51E. Before heading to seat 51E, I ate dinner then informed that flight attendant that I was going to move, in which she replied “okay.” When I arrived to seat 51E, I noticed that no one was seated in the seat. Approximately 10 mins later, a woman came over and started screaming that I was in her seat and proceeded to shove me. I explained to her that the flight attendant told me to sit there. However, I would be more than happy to switch with her. She proceeded to scream “you moved my stuff” as she grabbed her items from the seat pocket in front of me. Clearly, her items were not moved as she grabbed them herself. Then, the woman called over the flight attendant and continue to yell for approximately the next 10 mins in Mandarin, disturbing and waking up other passengers. After the flight attendants walked away, the customer grabbed the booklets from the seat pocket, safety guide, and bag and threw them at me and then down the aisle, which caused a flight attendant to return. After this incident, I was asked to move to seat 34K. This airline does not care about their passengers. Beware!	0
Flight 1: I arrived early to Detroit - 3 hours early because international flight. They would not take my checked bag because I was too early. They stated that they only take check bags 1 hour prior to boarding time. This meant I was stuck sitting in the pre-security area of the airport for 2 hours. I had no access to food. Flight 2: Delayed leaving Toronto. Obtained updates via text that changed 10 times and had 3 gate changes in the airport. Flight 3: My assigned seat was given to someone else. I was told, oh there are empty seats. I found one myself. When we boarded it was raining - they closed the doors and then we were told we had to wait to take off. Waited for over 30 mins. Flight 4: No issues. Picked up bag only to find it must have sat on the tarmac in the rain at flight 3 time - everything in my bag was soaked when I got it. Flight 2 and 3 were on larger planes that appeared to be newer but no power plugs for phones or iPads. App for movie worked fine. I was not impressed at all. Will avoid flying with Air Canada rouge in the future!	0
Las Vegas to Toronto. Very rude staff. No snacks offered. Asked for water twice, half hour later no one brought it. When asked for the third time they started giving attitude like it's our fault. The plane was half full yet they lied saying it overfilled and people need to check in their carry on. Plane was delayed. The board information was not updated until the last second. Will never fly Air Canada again.	0
Calgary to Toronto. First time flying with Air Canada rouge and the last. The aircraft smelled like a children's daycare center, probably not cleaned for some time. The crew seemed totally uninterested and displayed an "I wish I was not here attitude". The flight was fine, left early and arrived early but no comparison with an actual Air Canada flight.	0
This was the worst airline I have ever bought a ticket from. I had to change my trip because of a death in the family and was looking forward to using my credit (after additional cost) however the cancellation policy was lost in translation and I was told I had one year to use it. Not the case. Two weeks after the one year mark of the original purchase I call to book and they’re sorry “I will have to take it as a loss”. I would have happily paid to extend it - now I will never give them my business. Good customer service doesn’t cost a company anything, and keeps people coming back. Disappointed is an understatement after the Experience with Aeromexico. Do not bother!	0
Vancouver to El Salvador via Mexico City. I can not put into words how bad the customer service is with this airline and the lack of caring and inability to provide a basic level of service. We did not even make it onto our flight due to outrageous prices to re book a flight on top of our original purchased tickets and with penalty fees. We lost a vacation and a lot of money. I do not understand how an airline is allowed to operate out of a Canadian airport and only offer by phone customer service back to the defunct business they are allowed to run in Mexico. I hope that if anyone reads this before considering flying with this airline please re consider at all costs. This airline is criminal.	0
I flew from London to Cairo via Athens. Once arrived in Cairo we found that one of our bags went missing. We filled in a report form and told we would be contacted shortly. We received no reply for the duration of 2 weeks at which point I went to their office on the 4th floor in Cairo airport to find out that the bag had arrived and was returned once again to Athens. We were never contacted or informed of its arrival. The lady I spoke to said she would contact Athens and request for it to be returned. 2 weeks later we still have no bag and the office in Cairo is saying they have received no reply from Athens. Absolute shambles.	0
Athens to Hamburg. Overall a very bad experience. We boarded the aircraft for the flight to Hamburg through a jetway and while taxiing they told us that there is a problem and we had to change aircraft. We were waiting inside the aircraft without any other information and about an hour later we were asked to deplane to a bus and then board another aircraft through a boarding ramp.  Aegean could have used a jetway to avoid this hassle and they should have better informed us about the expected delay. We arrived at Hamburg delayed by at least 2 hours and no apology throughout the flight. All staff behaved as if nothing had happened. My family missed their train connections and had to pay for new expensive tickets.	0
We flyed from Tenerife to Dublin on the 06/08/2019. We arrived to Dublin on the 07/08 at 12:30am. Our big suitcase went missing. Now is 72 hours and still nothing! We filled Up the form on the airport with a very rude lady from aer lingus. I calling them every day since,but nothing. I called Tenerife airport and they confirmed that my bag leave Tenerife with me on the aircraft heading to Dublin. What else I Can do? Unprofessional service on the ground and aircraft as well.	0
Aer Lingus lost our baggage on a flight from Dublin to Edinburgh 7 days ago. We did everything we were asked. We gave the address to the hotel where we were staying but the baggage never arrived. We requested that the baggage be sent to Glasgow Airport and held until Friday August 2nd Where we would be flying out of next and Aer Lingus representative agreed to do so and we have a confirmation. Once we arrived in to Glasgow Airport we were told the baggage was sent back to Edinburgh for some unknown reason. We have traveled without personal belongings for 7 days because the team has lied to us and been unprofessional.  After many phone calls, emails, and claims on their website we still are unsure where the baggage is or if we will ever see it again. We have requested that the baggage be mailed to our home to which they agreed. As of this morning however they can no longer locate our baggage. This is bad communication, bad service, and overall unprofessionalism.	0
Flew on leisure as a couple. Tried to book window/aisle seats in advance (16 EUR per person and segment). Airline said "no it's against the regulations" and forced us to book either window/middle or middle/aisle seat. Never heard of such regulation before. Other than that the usual mediocre AB service standards, chaotic check-in and boarding. You get what you pay for.	0
Flight started with two hours delay though the plane arrived in Rome from a previous flight with only marginal delay. Boarding was a total chaos with no pre-boarding for status clients. No reasons for a delay were given before boarding and no announcements were made by ground staff. Flight was then rerouted to Hannover with a subsequent 3 hour bus ride to Berlin because the airport in Berlin closes at 11 pm. and the flight left Rome only at 10.40 pm. The passengers were not informed until 15 minutes before the plane landed in Hannover though it must have been clear in Rome before the start that the flight was not going to Berlin.	0
Toronto to Bucharest. Contacted Customer Care at Air Canada and have been provided with links to the policies of the company - very much useless. Paid over 2 thousand dollars for my parents for an international flight, paid about 300 dollars round trip for regular check in luggage below 23 kg. My parents got a piece of bread dipped in maple syrup, no free coffee or tea on the flight to Bucharest last night. Will think twice before booking Air Canada. I will not make that mistake again.	0
Las Vegas to Toronto. There was nothing premium (or Rouge's version of Business Class) about this aircraft or service. First, the aircraft: a very old 767 where the overhead bins were not configured to match today's carry-on baggage. Thankfully, my carry-on was only partially filled because I had to push that down to squeeze it into the bin above my seat. The seat itself looked premium class in a 2 by 2 by 2 configuration. On take-off and landing everything rattled and shook and I was actually surprised the plane made the flight without falling to pieces. Service: only a bottle of water laid on the seat with no pre-flight drink service like other "business class" offerings from other airlines. The wine, if one wants to call it that, was barely drinkable and I chose the pasta meal choice because the curry from the butter chicken was making me nauseous and I was in row 1! The crew did the mandatory service of drinks followed by lunch then a snack before landing. However, in between all of this there was hardly any follow-up with the premium class passengers. They were more concerned with ensuring that the curtain from the cabin to the galley was shut solid with the velcro closures. Getting to Vegas I used a different airline where the service was top notch as it should for business class but the kicker: the other airline cost was about 70% less than what I paid for this dreadful flight!	0
Venice to Toronto. Horrible experience with this airline. Will never fly with Air Canada rouge again. We were delayed due to mechanical issues for nearly 3 hours causing us to miss our connection. Wouldn’t do anything to help and had the attitude that they got us from point A to B so who cares what time it was supposed to get in. Awful customer service. Entertainment system kept freezing up the whole flight. All in all a terrible experience.	0
Vancouver to Merida via Mexico City. It have never experienced a worst customer service anywhere. We booked a Business Class flight to Merida from Vancouver and it was uneventful, it was not bad but was not good. Mediocre food and mediocre customer service. On our way back is when it became a nightmare we had a 2 hour delay due a mechanical problem in our plane, we had to connect in Mexico City and after running with bags and cases to the gate 15 minutes before the plane will took off. The lady at the gate did not want to let us in (we were still in time to board), they were many passengers in our delayed flight and was actually fault of Aeromexico, but she say nobody inform her about the delay. She simply didn't want to help or even call a superior to help, she was rude and completely careless. She send us to another stand to make changes in our flight and we got one flight but in Economy, even they had seats in Business Class. They didn't offer absolutely any compensation or apology for the now 8 hours delay in the flight. Then at home, we called and emailed many several times for many hours and months where we have dealt with so many different people and phone numbers, they just refuse to compensate the delay and the downgrade on our tickets as it was our fault. They offered a ridiculous upgrade with a code where you have to call a special number and that only apply to specific flights and so on, practically an offer you cannot claim. I feel scammed and robbed, we pay for a service and they didn't provide it and they simply refuse to reimburse what we pay, or the difference of it. I have flown many times and with many different airlines and I have never experience a completely lack of empathy of the customer service personnel. It's almost as if Aeromexico sees customers as a threat, forgetting we are paying a service that they seem unable to provide. If you can avoid it, then choose another airline. Aeromexico will make sure you have a horrible travel experience.	0
Mexico City to Austin. This is the worst airline. They will work to make you miss your connection, and force you to re-buy your ticket. You would be better off walking.  Over a month later I still shudder to remember flying with them. Constant stress and extortion. They should be permanently grounded.	0
I flew from London to Athens in July 2018 with 4 bags, paying extra for the service. Only 2 bags arrived. I made a report on arrival. The following day I was flying from Athens to Luxor via Cairo. I received an email after I had checked on for my flight that my bags had been found. As I had 2 hours before departure I had time to go and reclaim them. I went downstairs and was shown a store room, my bags were there however one of them a 33kg bag I had paid for was ripped and was not in any condition to make any extra journeys. At the desk I was offered that they could replace the one big broken bag with 2 smaller ones. I accepted and I took one of the bags to Egyptair and checked it on whilst leaving the other with their supervisors to check in so I didn’t have to pay a fine for an extra bag. This bag was left in with them to send on the same flights and meet me in Luxor. The bag didn’t arrive plus I didn’t have any ticket for the bags to trace. I started the very very long and painful process of trying to find my bag via email. This was 7 weeks ago. Every week I get the same generic email that says they are at my disposal and want to help. Finally yesterday I had an email telling me to go to Luxor airport and get my bags proving me with ticket references. I arrive at Luxor airport only to find they have provided the ticket of the bags from London to Athens which are shown as claimed. But their email states this are from Athens to Luxor. This is the most ridiculous situation I’ve ever encountered. How can an airline lose your bags twice and provide ticket numbers from previous flights.	0
7/12 ready to fly home from Edinburgh to Hartford CT via Dublin. We were told the connector from Edinburgh to Dublin was late and we couldn’t fly to Hartford. We were re-routed to Heathrow and then to Boston and were told by Aer Lingus that we were ‘on our own in Boston’. We had to wait at he Edinburgh airport for 5 hours before boarding the flight to Heathrow and were given a measly 5 pound credit for food. When we complained about being stuck in Boston at 9:30p.m. They said this happens all the time. Basically they couldn’t get rid of us fast enough. A terrible experience at every level.	0
We had to disembark the plane due to brake failure and spend the night at a hotel.  No one to show us where to go to get hotel voucher etc. Due to it being around 11pm the hotel was not offering any food and I was told I could go downstairs in the airport where there was a supermarket. Drag my luggage down there now.  The next day I check in only to discover my boarding tag was made out to some woman continuing on to Bangkok. I told them I was going to Abu Dhabi only, but the guy at the check in counter said it was ok. So back to the service desk. They issue me a new boarding pass and ensure my luggage would arrive in Abu Dhabi. Of course it didn't, and to make matters worse, they did not give me a claim ticket on the new pass. Again no apology. After clearing security I am asked to return to the ticket counter. Back through the airport again. All they wanted was to say my luggage would be ok and to apologize. At least someone finally said they were sorry. I get to the gate and the plane was latte leaving by an hour. Very arrogant and ignorant people at the gate.  As people said earlier, bad food and tiny seats. 	0
Changed gate with no notice on board, made hundreds of already checked in customers wait in a hallway near the gate for over an hour with no explanation or communication of any kind. There was no reason for the wait except to tell us that the flight was delayed 5 more hours, and to give us a tiny credit to one food concession stand which could not come close to paying for the lunch we were now going to need to buy in the airport. We showed up to the proper gate early only to be told there was an additional hours delay. Got on board only to be told there would be another hours delay. Husband who is 5'9 and 150 lbs was unable to sit in his seat without his knees cutting into the metal frame structure of the back of the seat ahead of him. His seat did not recline at all and his screen for movies/tv did not work. He was in pain and discomfort for the whole time we waited on-board.	0
Montreal to Chiang Mai via Beijing. Worst international travel experience. After booking my flight, I could not request a special meal, seriously, all means failed, North America customer service phone number that no one answer despite holding for hours, email that is published on their website for north america that bounce back and does not exist, and website that denied me access to login. 2Meals on the flight were absolutely disgusting from my views. Connecting time is very short end up not to catch my next connecting flight, and could not find any staff of this airline or any counter for them in the YUL airport, despite on the flight I was told as soon as you leave the luggage area, you will see our staff and our counter, there was nothing to be found. In flight washroom was not clean and toilet cover does not stay open, meaning dis-functional. In flight from Chiang Mai to Beijing, the noise from the Chinese tourist was over whelming and yelling in the flight as if they in the back street of a Chinese village. The seat was not comfortable, not enough leg room, no stage to keep anything personal in front of you. In general not recommended airline to fly with, and customer service is not on there focus at all.	0
I advise to avoid this airline at any cost! Cabin crew on the international flights can’t communicate in any other language than Chinese. At the same time you would not find them neither attentive nor friendly nor pleasant at occasion. Food is very average. What was the worst part of the trip is how unfriendly I was treated when relocated myself and occupied free seat in first row. They literally had all the seats unoccupied in the first row (apparently unless you pay for these seats during booking, they won’t even open them during checkin), so I decided to take the seat (being 190cm tall) for that 11 hours journey,  it didn’t take long for a flight assistant to approach me and insist I return to my original seat (still same coach cabin) because “these seats were 100$ more expensive”. The overall experience was very bad for that flight and service and I next time I would do anything not to fly with Air China, so should you..	0
Deer Lake to Toronto. Flew to Newfoundland on Friday and flight was delayed over 2 hours due to mechanical problems. Now trying to fly back to Toronto on Monday after a great weekend only to be delayed 4 hours due to mechanical problems. I love Newfoundland (born in Ontario) but stay away from this airline - Rouge is a nightmare.	0
Toronto to San Pedro via Mexico. Do not travel with Aeromexico! My husband and I planned this vacation for 5 days in Honduras, where we have friends and since we bought the tickets through an agency we never were told that my husband needed a special permit to get into Honduras due to his nationality. When the date comes we get to the airport and the girl who checked us in never mentioned or asked us about this permit when checking our documentation. She only asked us for our USA visa and our Canadian visa which we had. After we get to Mexico City and the same thing happened. Nobody told us about this permit even though they knew about the final destination was Honduras. When we got to Honduras the Migration agent didn’t let us in as my husband didn’t have this permit. So we went to claim the airline for letting us get to that point without notifying us what we needed when checking our documentation and all we received was a very bad attitude, unprofessional and disrespectful like we owe them something. The information we got from every single person that we talked to was inconsistent and they kept avoiding responsibility and telling us that it was migration fault to not let us in. Which is ridiculous. Another guy at Mexico City told us that the airline was not responsible to ask the passengers Or check if their travel documentation were in order. We have traveled around the world and the first thing the airline ask for is your visa or permit in order to let you get into the plane. Anyway, They gave us a return ticket to Mexico but didn’t give us a connection ticket from Mexico to Toronto, and when we asked for it they would through the responsibility to other members a part from that they didn't give us time to even communicate to our friends who were waiting for us on the other side. After that we realized that they assigned us separate seats and when we asked to help us getting two seats together they got angry at us like it was our fault. staff not helpful or even interested to be accommodative. The story keeps going on. After all my husband and I found a common factor of this company Aeromexico don't care about the customer, all they care about is our money. Garbage Service!	0
New York to Lima via Mexico City. The worst experience of my life. They are totally inflexible, the treatment to the client is terrible, inhuman. I made a 3-day trip to Peru for the death of a family member and on my return to NY they did not let me board the flight because I did not have an American residency letter in process. I had to take 4 extra days and pay almost $ 600 for the letter from the embassy, ​​which told me that this happened only because of the REGULATIONS OF THE AIRLINE. After this I tried to take a flight as soon as possible back to NY since I was losing many days of work, in addition to having left my 2 little children of 2 and 4 years and with whom I had many responsibilities. The airline did absolutely nothing to help me. On the contrary, they wanted to charge me $ 2000 for the change of ticket since the only available space was in premium class and that seat can not be sold "like that". Finally, due to the lack of empathy and support from Aeromexico, I had to buy another ticket in LATAM for $ 726 one way and FOR CERTAIN NEVER REQUESTED ME THE EMBASSY LETTER for which I spent 5 days doing the procedure.	0
Terrible customer service at Heathrow check-in and boarding gate. There was no Aegean Airlines staff to assist passengers. The staff at check-in and at the gate appeared to be untrained or poorly trained, and two of them were rude, abrupt, and unwilling to help me with a simple issue about my baggage excess weight with one stating to leave me behind if I did not reduce the excess weight and the other at the gate, forced me to check in my quite small cabin bag in which I had my laptop, hard drive and other equipment.	0
Dublin to London. I had a flight booked as a stop over with another airline. I flew Aer Lingus just to transfer airports to the actual airline I booked through. Because of this third party booking I could not use the kiosk to print my boarding pass. I asked the woman at the kiosk for help and she told me to use the kiosk, when I explained the issue she told me that the kiosk was the only way to print my boarding pass. I tried to get help at the ticketing counter and was told they could not help because I had already purchased a ticket. By this point I was an hour and fifteen minutes into the process. I then stood in another line to get help from the baggage drop. Two people in a row went on break as I got to the front of the line leaving one person to help close to 200 people still in line. Then she shut down her line to help priority board the people who’s gates had closed. Finally got my boarding pass print after almost two hours in line. I then tried to check my bags in the automated line and was flagged because I was flying to the United States. I waited almost 5 minutes for someone to notice the big red light over my bags and come assist. No one did. I asked the man sitting in the empty line next to me for help (business class assistance line) and he told me that he would not help and that I needed to go find someone who would help me. Finally managed to find help. All in all it took over two hours to print a boarding pass and check my bags. I emailed customer service to simply make them aware of these issues and they have been more than unhelpful. She told me she could not help because I would not give her a valid booking number even though I have explained several times that I do not have one for her airline since I did not book with them to begin with. She also decided to assign a gender role when speaking with me. When I corrected her mistake and explained that I was offended by her presumption I was told it was my fault for not providing my gender when filing my complaint. I was so shocked by her response that I felt the need to address it with her supervisor. I asked twice to be transferred to a supervisor and in response they have stopped responding to my emails. All I wanted to do was let this company know about the problems I experienced. Instead I have receive some of the worst customer service of my life.	0
On the 13.06.2019. I had my flight with Aer Lingus from Dublin to Lyon. I purchased two hour lounge access with it for EUR 30.00 as i had a good experience with Dublin Airport lounges in the past. This is the most pathetic excuse for an airport lounge i have ever seen and i been to a lot of them. The selection of drinks was limited. The place was dirty, there was no food.  Next door, there is a far better lounge. After that my flight was delayed but nobody cared to communicate this to us. Then on the 16.06.2019. I could not view my boarding pass even though i had checked in the day before. I had to go to the counter to check in.  We arrived a little later at the Dublin airport, where my luggage was misplaced. I spoke to the ground staff and reported luggage as missing. Asked the ground staff on how to proceed next, and was advised they will find my luggage within 72 hours. 72 hours later still no luggage but an SMS to call them. After speaking to an associate for 30 minutes and not getting anywhere i asked for a supervisor and was promised a supervisor call back in an hours time. 20.06 filled out lost baggage survey and called customer support as i did not receive promised supervisor call back. Was transfered to a supervisor who told that this will be resolved in 5 days. I asked him what will happen if not, he said that this won´t be the case. That if not found they will consider it lost! 21.06 in the late afternoon called them again. Spoke to another person telling me that they found my luggage and will deliver it to be today or tomorrow. 22.06 late afternoon called again as i haven´t received my luggage. was advised, that they are still checking if this is my luggage. Then on the 25.06 i called again asking for an update. They said they still don´t have one. I asked to talk to supervisor and was promised a supervisor call back within an hour. At 07:00 pm i called again insisting to speak to a supervisor and spoke to the most incompetent supervisor i have ever dealt.  If a customer doesn't have their luggage for several days has spend hours on the phone you do not sigh at them.  I also escalated to Aerlingus via fb while they were quick to respond, no body took accountability for the action. Nobody from the complaints department reached out to me to find out what happened.	0
Seoul to Guangzhou via Tianjin. This was the worst travel experience I have had yet. The first leg of my journey was fairly smooth, but the airplane itself was old and threadbare. When it came time for the transfer, the flight was delayed and the gate changed, but this was not announced clearly and no staff was left at the old gate to redirect passengers. The second plane was also careworn and foul-smelling, and it would be generous to call the food mediocre. The plane was quite old and uncomfortable. When I tried to raise the headrest on my seat, it wouldn't move, so I had to stand up and push harder. At that point, the headrest flew off the rails and into the row behind me, hitting the man and woman there. The seat in front of me could not be put back fully upright, so that passenger's seat was leaning into me, even during mealtime. I would need to have a huge price margin between Air China and the next closest competitor before I would fly this airline again.	0
I was supposed to be flying from Tokyo to Hanoi via a transit flight through Beijing. The two flights was supposed to be 9 hours maximum, but due to a 40 minutes delay of the first flight, a lot of other customers and myself missed our transit. Even though the ground staff in Haneda airport assured me that I would meet my flight, I suddenly found myself freezing and stranded in the unknown land of Beijing for 9 hours, waiting for the next flight. To make matters worse, it was not to my intended destination. I had to take a flight to Seoul, waited there for another 4 hours, before flying another airline from Seoul to Hanoi. To sum it up, I wasted 26 hours of my time travelling whereas I should only have spent 9. The airline did not bother setting up accommodation for any of the guests, offering only a meagre amount of 200 yuan (less than 30 dollars) as “compensation”, which, realistically speaking, is nowhere near enough for a hotel room. The staff were rather unhelpful and unprofessional. As far as I am concerned, I did not receive any apologies throughout the whole ordeal. The only “explanation” given was that “More than 20000 other guests are also in the same situation”. This “explanation” to me sounds more like an admission of inefficiency on their part than anything really. My luggage, which was stuck in Beijing, was handled without an ounce of care. It was just put randomly in front of the Air China office with no one to look after and could have been easily stolen. The ground staff were extremely unfriendly and unprofessional. When I came to the Air China luggage office, despite the fact that there were 3 staff members on duty, they did not respond to my questions despite my repeated gesturing, preferring to chat among themselves instead. Overall, I had an extremely unsatisfying experience with ChinaAir and will not ever use this service again. I do NOT recommend this airline to anyone.	0
Flying with Air Canada Rouge from Athens to Toronto was my most difficult experience so far. In addition to pay extra for alcoholic drinks, ear phones, seats designated for mothers and babies, I had to pay for entertainment. The internet is very expensive and charged by hour.  The flight was 11 hours. Traveling with an 18 months old baby, I was forced to purchase the WiFi service, $42.50 for the whole flight. There was no written instruction in the seat pocket so the pilot gave us instructions in the beginning. With a baby sleeping on my lap, I had to call for help. The flight attendant gave a brief instructions and left. My credit card was charged but the page crashed. I could not use the service. Again I had to asked for help, the flight attendant came and advised that she cannot troubleshoot and we have to chat with ground.  My husband had to spend half an hour just to get the refund for that transaction. I was given a notice to hold my baby when the seat belt sign was on for so long during the flight and there was no turbulence.  We were offered hot drinks two times during the flight and due to the turbulence we could not have them, I understand it's because of safety but they should come back after the seat belt sign is off to serve those who wish to have hot drinks. This is a service that it has been paid for. At the time of check-in we asked for a seat with bassinet. Although that there was a free one but we had to pay extra plus since the baby was older than 1 year, he could not use the bassinet due to the safety issue.  So what's the use of paying extra if I cannot use the bassinet in this flight.  The food was awful. There was absolutely no accommodation for the young children and babies, Unfriendly staff. I chose this flight because I had good experience with Air Canada. I did not know that Rouge is different.	0
Buenos Aires to London via Mexico City. My seat and entertainment area were broken for the whole duration of the flight. We booked Premier class seats so we could have a fully reclining seat on a long flight. These tickets are 4x the price of a normal seat and are advertised as extremely comfortable, fully reclining seat and so on. Could not use any of the features Premier stands for and the upright position of the seat is stiff and uncomfortable. Their reaction was: "You need to contact customer services to get compensation, there is nothing we can do." Customer services finally got back to me and they claim and I quote: "the entertainment services inside our aircraft are considered courtesy." What do you pay so much extra for in premier class if it is all considered a courtesy? I don't even care about the entertainment, it is the seat and back support you really pay for but as it is completely electronic chances are those don't even work and you still can not lie down. At least in economy you can move the back of the seat back a little regardless if there are electronic issues! The Customer service is terrible as they don't care about anyone. You have to be lucky that even when you pay a lot of extra money you get a working seat. A gamble we are not taking again.	0
Five of us flew from LAX to CAN, each of us had 1 carry on luggage and 1 personal bag. We checked the Aeromexico website prior to our flight and the information there was we are allowed one carry on with 22lbs each. We had no problem with our luggages from LAX-CAN. But to our surprise when we are flying back to LA, Aeromexico ground stewardess was weighing our carry on luggage together with our personal bags, so obviously all of us are going to have overweight baggage. We explained our side that from LA we didnt have the same problem but the staff are not accommodating. We had a bad experience with this kind of service and probably won’t be flying with Aeromexico again. We had to check in three pieces of luggage and will have to wait for it at LAX. Had we known that our personal luggages will be included in the 22lbs allowance, we should've prepared better. I dont see the point checking the baggage information in their website if it is not clear. It is the first time that I encountered an airline weighing the personal bag of their customers.	0
Brussels to San Francisco via Dublin. I have never in my life experienced such poor customer service. I booked a flight from BRU to SFO, but due to weather and slow ground operations at DUB airport I ended up missing my connection to SFO. I got rebooked onto a flight from DUB to JFK and JFK to SFO. Not only did this add 15 additional hours to my trip they also managed to lose my bags in JFK. When I finally arrived in SFO at 3am after 30h of traveling, all 3 of my bags were missing. Additionally I had made a bid to upgrade to business class, based on the information I was given: a flight from DUB to SFO. However when I got rebooked, I got downgraded to economy for the second leg of the flight. And of course, availability isn’t always there, but when I raised this issue with them, they refused to compensate me or give me a partial refund. Over the course of 4 days I made over 16 phone calls, filled out multiple complaint claims, reached out to them on twitter. But they did nothing to help me retrieve my bags. I kept getting the same standard answer over and over again: As American Airlines were your final carrier they will need to trace the missing baggage. In our industry, it's the final carrier's responsibility to return the delayed baggage. They will work directly with us on your behalf to return the bags to you as soon as possible. And indeed, they tried to work with Aer Lingus. They put in 3 requests to get the bags transferred onto their system. But Aer Lingus was  unresponsive. I also reached out to Aer Lingus’s own delayed baggage department, who also put in a request and sent 2 emails to raise this issue. Yet again, not a single response from Aer Lingus. As a result, my bags are still being held hostage in the Aer Lingus terminal at JFK. After yet another attempt to raise awareness with Aer Lingus on twitter, I got shut down without any meaningful response. This seems to be their thing: making customers go away as fast as possible while providing zero help. Filing a complaint on Aer Lingus has been designed to frustrate and infuriate people.  Of course, things won’t always go according to plan, and often there’s not much that can be done about it, but a company like Aer Lingus should have a proper system for dealing with complaints in a timely manner, supported by caring staff. Putting customers through the same form over and over again is only designed to make them go away.	0
In May 2015 I caught the flight from Chicago O'Hare to Berlin Tegel. The aircraft was an Airbus 330. I was allocated a window seat but had no window. A woman who had paid an extra $50 for a window found herself in the same position but was not given a window. The aircraft was very overheated and had no individual air vents above the seats. The individual lights above my seat illuminated my neighbour rather than my seat. There were inadequate numbers of toilets for the large number of passengers. This resulted not only in severe discomfort for passengers but the water supply ran out in the toilet closest to me resulting in toilet paper not being flushed. The food was as cheap and nasty as I have ever had in Economy. I am not tall but had very little leg room. I could do very little work not only due to the shortage of space but the intense heat of the aircraft. The TV and movie selection was OK but not great but the TV screen in the back of the seat in front of me kept skipping or freezing every time the passenger in that seat vibrated the seat - extremely irritating. On approach to Berlin droplets of water started to drip on me and the passengers around me. On arrival the aircraft parked a very long distance from the terminal building. We were bussed to the terminal - this took about 10 minutes. We were then kept on the bus for another 10 minutes before being released into fresh air. The terminal for Air Berlin at Tegel turned out to be a shed with only 4 customs officers for hundreds of non-EU passengers. It took about an hour in a line to clear customs. (EU passengers cleared in minutes due to their automated passport readers.) I am a QANTAS frequent flyer and ended up on Air Berlin because it is a One World partner with QANTAS. How Air Berlin managed to join that partnership of good to excellent airlines is a mystery only the executives of those airlines can answer. I will be complaining to QANTAS and Air Berlin directly. The small number of flight attendants worked very hard and were pleasant but I felt sorry for them.	0
Toronto to Venice. Delayed 1 hour 40 minutes on departure due to technical difficulty. No water offered in that time. Personnel used last 3 rows of seats for themselves and didn't allow people to use them. Food was barely edible for me. Not enough room for knees for average man.	0
Horrible Service! Would have given zero stars if that was an option. Several hours before our flight I received an email informing the flight was delayed 12 hours. When I called Aeromexico to confirm the flight delay, they told me the flight was not delayed and I should go to the airport for the normal scheduled departure. I called twice to confirm and was told to go to the airport. When I arrived at the airport, there were hundreds of people in line for AeroMexico and agents only said to wait in line and gave no information. After an hour in line that never moved, I walked up to the front of the line and demanded to speak to an agent. I was told that the flight was delayed until the next morning. Our flight was rescheduled and delayed several times over the course of 15 hours and we had to sleep at the airport. The final attempt to reschedule our flight was on an overbooked flight and they could not seat us. We were told the only available flights would be many 5 days later! This caused us to miss our entire trip. The counter agent told us to call Aeromexico and maybe the operator could be of service. We called and was on hold for nearly an hour before being given an email address as a source of contact. There is no one to speak with regarding complaints or flight cancellations. The company only communicates via email. Horrible customer service. I wrote an email explaining what had happened. The company responded saying since they offered us a flight, even if it was 5 days later, they would not refund the tickets nor offer a credit! We spent over $1400 on two tickets and they could not even offer a credit.	0
We also were victim of poor management by Aeromexico. After two delays our flight on january 2nd 2019 was canceled leaving us stranded in Puerto Vallarta. This airline doesn't inform passengers, doen't plan ahead and most of all doesn't care about you! Passengers had to inform themselves what was going on. Story most heard was that due to fog in the morning in Mexico City Aeromexico started to book passanger from the first planes that had to leave out of Mexico City over to later flights. That meant that the last flights had to be cancelled. They knew that from the start. Didn't act and let passenger on these last flights hours in stress before telling them at midnight that they could retrieve their bags from the belt and look for shelter. We had a 24 hour delay, had to take a bus to Guadalajara because this stupid action which also caused overbooked flights for the next four days(!). There were no excuses, no compensation whatsoever. Just a reaction that it was due to weather condition (which false, the weathet was perfect that afternoon. My advise: don't ever fly with Aeromexico. If you do, don't complain (and you will be sorry!!).	0
Bogota to Los Angeles via Mexico City. Worst customer service experience in over 30 years of travel! Aeromexico employees in Mexico city are of the utmost unprofessional, ill informed employees I have encountered. From the moment our plane arrived we were misled, disregarded in regards to a connection to LA. We had a conversation to make and had to get our luggage to move forward. We were missing one piece of luggage. I Immediately I went to representatives, showed them my ticket and was told to just wait. This us where the ineptitude and arrogance began. Not only was I misdirected to 3 wrong areas but was just pointed in the general direction of where to go by supervisors of all people! Knowing that we were on the verge of missing a flight at NO fault of our own. I insisted that we be taken by someone Personally and this employee took me to the wrong area as well. NO ONE knows what is going on and above all RUDE about it. Aeromexico is not the airline you want to consider traveling with first and last time with this home of a company!	0
Jeddah to Athens. The seating is economy with the center seat blocked. There is no entertainment system. No coat chef, amenity bag or blanket. There were pillows and newspapers. The single attendant for business class was not available. The window blinds in the cabin were not closed so when the sun rose the cabin was flooded with light. The product is terrible. This is a 3.45 am departure (3hr 30min flight) and there are no services to accommodate night flight passengers. Turkish flies a similar route and is markedly superior product.	0
Dublin to Seattle. Airline refused to check my bag all the way through to Denver and said Air Alaska was not partnered with them. Flight was 2 hours late leaving Dublin. Had no time to get bag and go to Air Alaska and recheck through. After arriving in Denver filed a complaint for last luggage. It’s been 3 days and not a phone call to me from Aer Lingus. All my info address and phone number are on my bag. They will not answer the phone when Air Alaska calls. My travel agent and Air Alaska keep trying to reach them and no response. I have filed a complaint with the airline with a response they will contact my in the next 14 days. I just want my bag returned. I’m very frustrated with the lack of care or response as from the airline.	0
On May 5th, 2019 my husband and I had a flight going from Naples to Dublin, Ireland (with Aer Lingus), then from Dublin to New York JFK airport, NY (Aer Lingus) and then from New York to Tampa with Jetblue. Our flight from Dublin, Ireland to New York (JFK) on May 5th was supposed to take off at 4:20 PM (16:20), however it did not take off until approximately 10:00 PM (22:00). We landed in New York, NY at 11:05 PM (EST.) We were supposed to arrive in New York, NY at 6:55 PM (EST.) When we arrived at the gate in Dublin there were no employees available to speak to. After some time, they announced the flight would be 15 m delayed. Approximately every 1-1.5 hours they continued to push back the time the flight would leave without any explanation. Finally, they announced it was delayed because of technical difficulties. We were also told that we would not be told if we would make it to Tampa that night until we landed in New York, NY.  When we exited the plane, we were given a printed ticket with a time for 9:54 AM the next morning  to arrive in Tampa, FL at 1:00 PM pm May, 6th 2019. We were originally supposed to be in Tampa at 11:18 PM on May 5th, 2019. We were not able to get into the hotel until 1:30 AM including time for waiting for customs, shuttles, and long line at the hotel. The next morning, we arrived 3 hours early at the jetblue gate (on the email it instructed to check in at jetblue and we could not check in online.) While at the Jetblue checkin, the jetblue employee told us that Aer Lingus had not finished completing our booking, and that there was nothing they could do about it. She also told us the flight was almost full, and we may not be able to get on the flight. At this point we were beyond frustrated and upset. We called Aer Lingus and told a representative our problem. She put me on hold for approximately 20-30 minutes. She then said Aer Lingus had not finished the booking and then she finished the booking. We were then able to get our tickets. Our flight to Tampa was also slightly delayed due to fuel issues. We landed in Tampa at 1:30 PM (a total of 14 hours and 10 min after the original arrival scheduled time.) We were given 16 euro worth of vouchers at the airport for food in Dublin. This delay in the flight caused both me and my husband to miss work until 3 PM on Monday. The situation was handled poorly without little information and not booking our tickets.	0
Conclusion: avoid Aer Lingus if you are traveling as a family. They do not respect the value of family and no one is willing to take any responsibility after our horrible experience with them. What happened: We booked a returned flight from/to Toronto to Frankfurt. We were traveling with our 9 month old baby. Right after we booked and paid the tickets, we called the agent to request a baby bassinet and priority seats both ways immediately. We flew from Toronto to Frankfurt with bassinet, no problem. But the agent said we need to make another call before our return flight to reserve the bassinet. 48 hours before our return flight on April 1st, we called the Aer Lingus office in Germany where we would board the flight. They told us they have no access to the seating system and asked us to go to the airport counter for requesting the bassinet. We arrived three and a half hours before the scheduled flight time to check in and to request the bassinet (We were the second in line after the counter was opened). The person on the counter told us, she has no access to the flight from Dublin to Toronto, which is the long flight after our first short flight from Frankfurt to Dublin. She asked us to request the bassinet seat when we transferred at Dublin airport. I asked her, there will only be less than 2 hours transfer time, wouldn't the seats all be taken? What if we do not get a bassinet seat? She said she cannot help and we can only go and find out there. We arrived at Dublin airport, when we went to check in for the second flight, which is going to be 7 and half hours long from Dublin to Toronto. The lady at the counter said there is no bassinet seats anymore and she cannot help us. She told us rudely that there is nothing she can do and we can only go board the plane and ask the cabin crew for the seat change. We boarded the plane EI129, and of course it is full and there was no single crew member who was willing or able to help us at all. We were sitting in the middle seats. Carrying a 9 month old baby at hand. No extra seats or spaces were beside us. And all the crew members were very unfriendly to us. One of them told us it was because there was a last minute cabin change so two families with babies could not get the bassinet seats including us. They even told us: sorry this happened every week I saw many families always left without their requested prioirity seats in the end especially for Sunday and Monday flight. During the whole 7 and a half flight, we did not feel well at all. No one helped us, no one cared about us. Even when my husband was standing beside the hallway to rock the baby and tried to let her sleep because our seats were so tight and small she couldn't nap, one of the crew member came to us and said we cannot stand there. (The seat belt sign was not on at the moment). The baby was crying nonstop because she was so tired but kept getting disturbed by these actions. We asked to speak to the cabin manager three times, and throughout the whole flight not once he came to communicate with us. We felt deeply sad about the unfortunate experience. We contacted Aer Lingus customer service and no one is willing to take responsibility and respond to us.	0
Delhi to New York via Beijing. My experience with Air China was horrible. I won't recommend it to anyone. They are unprofessional, not ready to listen to anyone. They changed my boarding pass to another flight. My transit time became 11 hours from 1.5 hours because of this. Didn't give me lounge at first. There was no food arranged by them. No internet. They owe a responsibility to arrange lounge, food, hotel if they are the one changing anyone's flight. Ground staff wasn't listening to anyone. Now after boarding to this changed flight, I got to know that my meal preference were not mentioned in crew members chart. And because of their unexpected change I missed my following flight. They didn't compensate even for that. At New York airport when I tried to explain it to their staff, he gave me one email address to file complaint. Guess what, that email address was not for complaints. It was for baggage claim. Now I had to call their office many times to get right email address. Meanwhile I was directed from one place to other. When you call their phone number, in normal business hours their automated system says " you are calling outside business hours please call again later." They do not understand English properly. Their services are poor. Won't fly with them ever. Once was enough for me.	0
Auckland to Tokyo via Beijing. This is the worst airline of the modern aviation industry. They just took this whole thing to the next level. Everything was horrible starting from Check-in -> Landing. I request for a special meal due to food allergies, they told me that system does not allow them to put a request and simply hung up on me! Gave me no alternatives. I even sent an email to them but as their services are so poor they did not bother to reply.  When I asked the flight attendant regarding the meal options, she had no idea what lactose allergy is and she does not speak English. She gave me bread rolls with butter for the dinner. The way food was served as if they are doing a banquet dinner and wants to get over it as soon as possible On my way back from Beijing, Air China lost and damaged my bags. I went to the complaint, they brush me off by saying no English, No compensation or resolution. I got told to get things done in Auckland. I called their Auckland office and left a voice message but no one called me back, as usual, they did with the email. Beijing (PEK) Air China staff is extremely rude, heavily lacks communication and customer service skills. On return from Haneda - Japan to Beijing, I missed my flight connecting flight as I had only 70 minutes layover and my first landed when connecting flight check-in gate was closed. That's when Air China lost my bags but when I found them the following day they were damaged too. I got put on a different flight bag home following and my bags did not arrive on the same flight. They arrived the following day. Disappointment after disappointment. Please do not travel on AIR CHINA if you do not want to spoil things such as your mood, money etc. I would not give them any star but the system does not allow.	0
Flight from Montreal to Marseille in June 2019 delayed 2 hrs due to mechanical difficulties. We finally take off & 3 hrs into flight we turn around & return to Montreal because of mechanical difficulties. Sleep in airport for 4 hours. Board again, and delayed for another 2 hrs. Arrive in France 13 hrs late. We were told to keep our hotel receipts so we could be reimbursed. Not only do they refuse to reimburse us, but they won’t even provide name & contact number of a person to speak to - all communications must be done electronically. We went with AC because it was more affordable & between paying for seats & hotel rooms it ended up being significantly more $$.	0
Marseille to Washington via Montreal / Toronto. Flight from Montreal was delayed due to mechanical difficulties. We were forced to wait onboard for hours while they fixed the problem. We missed our connecting flight in Toronto & they had only 3 agents to help hundreds of guests that had missed their connection. We had to spend the night in Toronto & get new flight home the next morning. Air Canada refuses to reimburse for hotel room. Furthermore - there’s no phone number to call to speak to an agent - all communication must be done electronically.  Instead they offered me a voucher for a future flight - I will never fly Air Canada again!!	0
No entertainment. The only entertainment was through a in flight online service which is accessed through your own device. The service was not working for the whole flight. With a one year old child makes a 8 hour flight difficult. Lack of in flight service. To finish it off, they damaged our bag.  I tried to speak to them about it but they gave me a card to contact them on. Now back in the UKand don’t want to call at fear of further cost and their online complaint proceeded not working. So, I’m stuck, with no help.	0
Mexico City to Zacatecas. Booked a flight for my father with Aeromexico and on his connecting flight they cancelled and reassigned his flight 5 times. An 8am flight turned into a 9pm flight, he was stuck in the airport for hours with agents telling him they couldn't help. When I called they promised he would be on a 4:30 flight and still reassigned him 3 more times after that. Absolutely terrible will never book with them again.	0
Horrible customer service. We boarded our flight to Guatemala and my husband has a medical emergency before take off and we were taken off the flight and taken to the hospital. I have been trying to get a confirmation of our flight cancellation for insurance purposes. They say the cannot cancel my flight because they only have my ticket information but not my reservation. Orbitz cannot cancel my flight they say AeroMexico needs to. This is ludicrous! Apparently no one has our reservation but they can see our ticket and that we did not take the flights.	0
I recently made a round trip Montreal to Mexico City. My passport showed two last-names and my plane ticket showed only one last name. For this reason, Aeromexico made such a big fuss and made me buy a new plane ticket. It seems that adding only one last name to the plane ticket was extremely difficult for them since they refused to understand that all they had to do was a minor modification and not a change in the name on the plane ticket. Unlike many other airlines which are supportive and helpful in situations like these, their staff were extremely impolite,  and very unprofessional too. All they want is rip you off and get more money from you. Also, for unknown reasons, I received e-mails from them in which they confirmed two reservations, that I never requested, with different return dates, what an awful mix-up, not only are they rude but also incompetent. I strongly discourage anyone who is planning to fly Aeromexico: poor staff, bad service, terrible food, etc. I have travelled all over the world and this airline is definitely one of the worst. I do not recommend it, Aeromexico never again.	0
Portland to Mexico City., The AeroMexico website boasts about a great deal of wonderful services, on board WIFI, wonderful food, in flight Entertainment and so on. This flight was not anything like that. They continually failed to deliver these amenities. There was no Wifi on any of the four planes I flew on. The Entertainment was impossible to hear over the noise of the engines. They boast about their "Complimentary Tequila". It was so incredibly bad. Special comment should be made about the "food" served on this airline. It should be noted that there is no alternative food or beverage service available for purchase. The food they served was so bad. On the Portland to Mexico City flight we were awakened at 2am by the cabin staff by the cabin staff serving Breakfast. This consisted of a cold and somewhat stale bun, with a paper thin slice of ham and a paper thin slice of cheese. (No condiments - just the dry bread and the ham and cheese), and a child sized serving of apple sauce) On the return flight from Mexico City to Portland, "Dinner' consisted of a 5 ounce cup of badly wilted "greens" which were garnished with a teaspoon of peas (No dressing just bare greens), a bare bun (No butter or other condiment), and about a Cup and a quarter of Rigatoni Pasta. This was garnished with about a teaspoon of unseasoned tomato sauce). The "dessert" was a small plastic tub of Vanilla Pudding-like product. Mexico is the home of Vanilla. This item contained none of that - it reeked of cheap artificial vanilla. Beverages are served in what appeared to be a 4 ounce portion. This included the Coffee and the water served on board. A six hour flight and four ounces of water per passenger. The Aeromexico hub is the Mexico City Airport. Each time, When we boarded the first leg of our flight, we were not told where to find the second leg of the flight. The airport is incredibly poorly marked - and no AeroMexico employee we talked to within the Mexico City airport could tell us where to go to find the second leg of our flight. On our return flight, the Departures Monitor told us that our flight would be leaving from "Gate K". Which is impossible because all of the actual gates at this airport bear numbers and not letters. It took us two hours to get of the first plane and find the second plane. There was not enough time to buy bottled water or any other alternative food. There are some significant issues with this airline.	0
I naively offered $50 more to upgrade when they sent me an offer. A day or so later, I got a message that my offer to upgrade by $840 had been accepted. I got on the phone and email immediately. I wasted six or so hours (when I needed to be getting ready for the trip) trying to straighten out what I at first thought was a misunderstanding. I finally heard from guest services, who apologized for the inconvenience, but said upgrades were not refundable. I wrote back that it wasn't a matter of inconvenience, I couldn't afford the charge. I didn't hear back. I contacted my credit card company to dispute the charges. When I got to the desk in New York, I said I wanted my seat in economy, the one I'd paid for. One clerk was helpful, but a supervisor came and said an upgrade was not refundable. I said, "My credit card company is disputing the charge." He looked at his screen and found me a seat in economy. At first I was grateful, but later felt miffed that I, the customer, had no one's ear, but mentioning the big credit card company finally got someone's attention. At least my return flight would be no hassle, that remained an economy ticket.  Two nights before my departure, I got a note saying I had been upgraded again, for $890 this time. It said, "Do not reply to this note." My phone didn't work in Europe. I sent guest services a note, much less polite this time, ordering them to restore my economy ticket. I didn't hear back. I didn't fly home with Aer Lingus. I missed my connection, and by then believed it was futile to try to get through to that airline, so flew home with another airline. It is a horror trying to get through to them.	0
Copenhagen-Dusseldorf-Miami both ways with my family (wife and three kids). Service on board was not as we expected. Some of the personnel was unfriendly and not very understanding concerning families with kids. There was a delay on our way from Miami to Dusseldorf were we sat for 3 hours in the plane and the only thing that they offered was a protein bar. Food on the plane was not so good and we had to buy some snacks to the kids. The entertainment system on the longer flight of 11 hours was not working well and there were no helps from the personnel or alternatives. The delayed flight home had us miss the connection flight and we had to wait for 12 hours in the airport since the company did not use the 10-11 hours we were in the air to try and find alternatives for passengers with connection flights. The ground personnel said they only knew it 10 minutes before we landed in Dusseldorf. This is according to my view not a professional way of running a customer focused company. We will never travel with Air Berlin again.	0
Started off great with Air Canada from Winnipeg to Toronto. Very accommodating and everything was on time. My connecting flight from Toronto to Deer Lake was not at all like that. It was delayed by mechanical issues which was fine, then they asked people to check their carry-ons because there was an overcrowded plane. We then boarded and had seating issues with not having enough seats for people. After all that was figured out, they “misplaced” cargo (a dog) and were still loading our original luggage two hours after our flight was supposed to leave. Should they not have seats and luggage figured out before hand? It was an overcrowded, unorganized mess and I would not recommend flying with Air Canada Rouge until they get things figured out.	0
Calgary to Las Vegas. Seats are small. They realized 10 min before boarding that their flight was oversold and were trying to move passengers to next flight and in this commotion they delayed the boarding and then because of bad weather we got stuck for another hour. Even after weather cleared they were the last airline to realize time to load bags? Honestly pay the difference and take a better flight.	0
I flew Aeroflot from LAX to and from Moscow. I brought 2 luggage to the airport counter knowing that as a Sky Team Premium member, I would be able to check in one additional luggage on top of one allowed luggage. According to the counter attendant, since Aeroflot system shows that I am not a Premium Member, I could not check in additional luggage. Even though I presented with the Korean Air Premium Membership card they flatly denied to check in the luggage. I went to Korean Air Counter and brought the manager to Aeroflot counter then Aeroflot demanded some kind of printout of my membership, then they allowed. It took more than 2 hours to check in. When I tried to check in at Moscow, same thing was repeating all over. However, this time I did not have Korean Air to back me up! Staff were rude and condescending. Again, it took more than 2 hours to check additional luggage! I do not know how to prevent the same trouble in my future travel.	0
At baggage drop I queued for 45 mins to check in my luggage. I had a small backpack and a cabin suitcase that were for hand carrying but they told me they could only allow one so I was forced to check in my cabin cases and pay for extra luggage. I didn't get to take valuables out because it was 40 mins before the departure time and I had to hurry to the gate. The flight from Venice to Moscow was delayed for around 30 minutes. Luckily I got to my connecting flight just in time. However, the flight from Moscow to Hong Kong was delayed as well for 1 hour. Luckily the plane still arrived in Hong Kong in time. I was happy when I stepped out from the cabin, but later only to find out that I couldn't see my luggage at the baggage claim. I went to the counter to look for help but they told me they didn't receive any notifications from Aeroflot about baggage misconnection and they couldn't even locate my luggage. The staff told me they were not from the airline so they couldn't help much and that they would send me back the luggage when they found it. I told them to send the luggage to a friend's place because my family was not in Hong Kong to receive the luggage for me. I bought some winter wears and basic necessities before heading to China on the same day and kept all the required documents to send to the lost and claims department of the airline. However, they refused to pay me back the expenses considering I had been in Europe for 2 months with all my belongings only because I am from Hong Kong. When I picked up my luggage from my friend, I found out that my hand luggage was opened by someone else. I would not fly this airline company again.	0
Reynosa to Mexico City. I flew with Aeromexico for the first and it was the worst experience ever. We went from Miami to Mexico City and it was fine but from there our flight to Reynosa was delayed so we booked another one. When we booked another we didn’t receive any sort of receipt or proof of flight so we went to check what departures are leaving soon and the flight that we apparently booked was until 3 days later and we had plans so we couldn’t wait. We took an autobus from Mexico City to Reynosa and it took 15 hours. Now that we are there we do everything we wanted to and our flight back was the worst. We had flights from Reynosa to Mexico City and from Mexico City to Miami. We weren’t allowed to board the plane because we didn’t verify that we were actually in Reynosa since we never took the flight, they used the excuse that they sold our tickets and we couldn’t do anything about. So the next day we went back and everything was fine and we got home. Never flying with Aeromexico again, worst experience, next time I’m taking American Airlines.	0
Houston to Mazatlán via Mexico City. Please read before you book any flight with Aeromexico! They have awful customer service when mishaps happen! My family and I traveled with them a few weeks ago and I will never travel with them again. Flight to Mexico was great. Flight coming back was a nightmare. They delayed our flight for no real reason (weather was perfect, plane was there and fine ... we asked multiple people and nobody had an answer). We then waiting on the tarmac for 1/2 hour .... right in front of an open gate. No reason. Because of these errors on their  part, we missed our connecting flight in Mexico City. Customer service was awful. I’ve never been treating so poorly and it was their fault we were in this inconvenient situation. Their best flight they could do for us was the next day - 20 hours out. We asked about different airlines, different airports to fly into, or at least accommodation for our family (a baby and 2 other small children) to go to. They just kept shaking their head no. It was horrible,  and we had no choice but to take our exhausted babies to a hotel and feed them and let them rest for the night. All hotels within a 1/2 hour hour radius are well over $300. And we were not even close to being the only ones who missed flights due to their errors and their claims they had nothing until the following day (even tho this was at noon). It made me wonder if they were in on it with the hotels and purposely doing this to their customers. They made us miss obligations back home, they turned a hard 6 hour travel day with little kids into a 26 hour travel day, and we are out over $400 for their short comings and inconvenience they brought onto us. And they refuse to reimburse or try to make any of it up to us. They are just awful!	0
Larnaca to Tel Aviv. This is the second time I was to fly Aegean Airlines. This time I bought tickets to fly in August 2018 in high price for comfortable flying hours since I am flying with young children. I found out the company cancel our flight and listing us to the uncomfortable flight time with no compensation.  I will not fly Aegean Airlines again.	0
Edinburgh to Miami via Dublin. Had our tickets changed twice at short notice ending up with a whole day sitting in Dublin Airport with young children. No apology, just get on with it. Try emailing guest relations which is a joke as they are simply not bothered, I presume due to the extremely high number of complaints. Yes its cheap but without a doubt at a high price when it comes to service.	0
I flew from Milan to Berlin round-trip and have to say that after several bad experiences with Air Berlin this time they were over the point. I booked the flight from Malpensa to Tegel and some weeks later they changed the airport from Malpensa to Linate which is further from where I live. This was just the beginning. On the flight back from Tegel to Linate although I was at the check in desk on time (70 mins in advance) they told me that I could not fly because the flight was overbooked! This was the evening flight and they offered me the chance to fly the next morning instead. They offered me another alternative to fly to Linate via Dusseldorf. So I went back to the Air Berlin desk where they gave me a new boarding pass. After finally arriving at Linate 3 hours later than initially planned what completed the disaster is that my luggage did not arrive. Never again.	0
We booked from Sydney to Frankfurt via Beijing for $1000 round trip via an online travel website. Awesome! Cheap price. A couple of months later, we decided to change our departure and return dates. Knowing that there would be penalties, we called the Air China call center and we were happy to hear that it would cost about $150 per person to make the change. We called 5 days later to apply the change and to our surprise, the total price to is now $630 per person. After many questions with the support center representative who barely spoke English, we found that we were given the wrong information on the first call. We asked to speak with the supervisor: he/she doesn't speak English! Really?? You are in the aviation industry and you don't speak English? We decided to verify with the travel website: They were going to charge $780! We had 2 choices: 1. Cancel the ticket to get $500 refund and buy another ticket at $1000 (and lose $500 per person) OR 2. Just change the tickets at $630 per person with Air China. Even though it is more expensive, we decided to avoid the hassle and go with the second option. Air China asked us for our passport numbers because their system would not allow them to make any changes without it. How is it possible that we bought the tickets online WITHOUT the passport numbers. They would not accept any other form of identification (no driver license, no national ID, no credit card matching the name of the passenger). This is our first experience with Air China and we haven't even boarded the plane. This is our last experience with Air China because we refuse to board this or any of their planes.  Do not book with Air China!! I hope this will help someone in the future in avoiding the issues we had to deal with even before boarding the plane.	0
Singapore to Seoul via Beijing. Brought a round trip with my family, missed the flight and whole trip including return trip is wasted (was told to cancel return trips and rebook again as they don't allow to change from return to single trip.)	0
Manchester to Toronto. I have never before come across a trans Atlantic flight with no onboard entertainment. No wonder what with the plane being so old. No-one seemed to be bothered that the flight was 2 hours late and that many passengers were going to miss their connections. A simple apology would have sufficed. Never again will I fly Air Canada.	0
Stockholm to Moscow with Aeroflot, and the ground service seemed okay at first, but made an error regarding our luggage even though we asked specifically about it so we had to spend some time fixing that later with a different airline. Flight attendants stood around bickering about something during the flight so I couldn't sleep. Plane was delayed several hours, airline would not help us with our connecting flight (which we missed). We had to book a hotel room since next flight was a day later. Airline won't confirm that they were delayed, so paper work with getting reimbursement for the hotel room from job isn't working either. It's not even Aeroflot that has to pay for it - they just have to confirm that they were in fact late but they won't do it! Only upside is that the food was okay. 	0
Mexico City to Tijuana. I was singled out and told to comply, never given a real reason other than my carry on wouldn't fit in the plane compartment and that it needed to be checked. I measured my bag and it fit just fine, like it had on so many past flights. So I refused to check it. When I raised my voice I was reprimanded by an aggressive and intimidating male employee who told me that I should not speak to a woman that way. I was singled out of a long line of people who had not yet boarded. I was told that there was not enough room on board for my carry on. A lie. There were at least 23 vacant seats as well once I boarded with my luggage that I refused to check. I had a laptop and some delicate art unframed that I had purchased in Ecuador that I had no intentions of checking with baggage.	0
Athens to Bucharest. Waiting in the bus (15-20min) to get to the plane, the flight was less than half full and they wanted to wait for all passengers in order to use only 1 bus. They had the old inflight magazine. Recently Aegean changed their policy and started charging seat selection up to row 14.  As a result, the second half of the plane was packed and the front was empty. Crew did not allow passengers to move to front seats. Snacks must be the worst ever.	0
London to Athens. I was at Heathrow and I had a carry-on baggage well below the required dimensions. Many people with bigger baggage were boarding without weighing them but then a rude gate agent weighed mine and found it heavier by 1kg and demanded in a very bad way to either pay a huge surcharge or be left at the airport! I found that unreasonable but I proposed to take out something if that was the case. They did not let me do that and strictly asked for my credit card to charge me or else deny me boarding the aircraft. I regret my choice to fly for the first time with Aegean. I will never fly with them again and the same will also happen with many other passengers of that flight that have been disturbed by the unacceptable behavior and offensive attitude.	0
Abu Dhabi to Berlin what a horror joined a long line which snaked out of the door into the duty free area the long line was caused by lack of security screening facilities. Once past security people are compressed into a small area whilst buses transfer you to the aircraft another painfully slow process. Once on board you get to witness some of the worse leg room in economy in the industry. It the took 1 hour to taxi out to take off unbelievable at 0200 in the morning get with the picture Abu Dhabi airport. Once airborne crew come through the aircraft in the dark to serve substandard food. Disembarking in Berlin passport control is at the end of the aerobridge so the line goes back towards the aircraft door and if your a non EU passport holder you can't even get to the line for that counter as the majority EU residents are blocking the path. Once through that process you wait in a small luggage claim area for your bags to eventually arrive! What a horrible experience from start to finish.	0
This has to be the worst service/food/treatment I've ever experienced. First off the food was terrible. I couldn't even eat any of it and it seems that was a common thing for the people around me. But the staff do not know how to speak English. They know key phrases and a few words but god forbid you have a problem because you wont receive any help because they wont understand you. If you loose your luggage, your flight is canceled, there are any changes they wont be able to explain anything or help you in anyway. This airline is cheaper for a reason and I highly recommend going with a different company because if you have any problems or questions you're in trouble. My flight to JFK was canceled and then the staff were actually yelling at me just saying "you wait 10 hours!". No explanation, no we're sorry, just yelling in Chinese and finger pointing. Don't get me wrong, you'll get to the place a little late but in one piece. But just expect to be treated like an animal.	0
No Customer Service Available for Emergencies. One day before we were set to fly back my husband had a scuba diving accident resulting in severe decompression sickness. The doctor said that he could die if he flew. I called Aeromexico to let them know we could not fly on our set day. When I called back to reschedule. They said that we could not reschedule without incurring penalty and extra costs unless we went through Customer Service. Guess what? Customer Service does not have a phone number. You can only contact through email and the wait time is 10-15 days for a response. When my husband was well enough to fly, we had to return to the US for treatment about 6 days after his accident. I booked Aeromexico tickets that cost about $900 one way. I figured we could work it out with Aeromexico when we returned home. However, Aeromexico refused to refund either our original tickets we purchased or the replacement tickets, even when we provided documentation of the accident and a letter from the doctor saying it was impossible for my husband to fly. I strongly suggest using an alternate airline. I have flown al over the world and have never encountered an airline with poorer customer service or a more heartless non-cancellation policy.	0
Vancouver to Lima via Mexico. Stone cold bagel is not an adequate meal for a 6 hour flight in business class. Dedicated check in counters? No, never heard of it. Online check-in? What's that? Priority luggage handling - doesn't exist. Access to lounges in Lima and Mexico (that belong to SkyTeam, separate complaint) - no, I have to pay. Despite the SkyTeam rules, clearly stated on the website (false advertising when it comes to Aeromexico). Crew doesn't speak English on international routes. Transiting in Mexico city - beyond disastrous. I almost missed my connection. Airport is a mess, no signage, nobody speaks English. I had to clear the customs and border control, and then run around looking for my gate, just to pass another security control (which was useless and ridiculous). Cabin crew on YVR-MEX route was atrocious. Service non-existent. Aircraft was dirty, passengers were seated in business class just because they knew someone or spoke Spanish. All four legs of my flight had completely different "service standards", with LIM - MEX being the only one with remotely acceptable in-flight service.	0
Aer Lingus staff in the airport refused to help me in any way. I missed a connection booked by Aer Lingus due to delay of previous Alaska Airlines connecting flight. I was redirected by another airline through Chicago, London (with 8 hour unwanted layover) then Belfast. It took me 46 hours to complete the trip and my luggage took 80 hours to arrive. I submitted complaint form to Aer Lingus and as yet have had no response. I have made numerous attempts to contact them via Facebook page and once again have received no help. The journey cost me over £300 in additional expenses. No mention of compensation or acknowledgment of my complaint. I did not actually manage to even get on an Aer Lingus flight at all and can therefore not give them any rating for service.	0
Dublin to Newark. Nightmare flights to and from Ireland this Christmas. Being disabled with and severe limited mobility, bulkhead seats that I booked and selected online were denied on both flights. For the outbound, I was told there was a aircraft change and so the seats were to bumped to middle of row in front of the bulkhead, with no recline. I made sure to call Aer Lingus twice during my stay to ensure we had the correct seating for the return journey. Both times we were guaranteed that our seats were correct and it also reflected “extra legroom” in the Aer Lingus App. On our return flight, I decided to check with the gate agent on our seating. He started off by stating that is illegal for someone like me to sit in those seats and said authorities may have to be called. I tried to correct him by say that these were bulkhead seats and not an exit row. He stated that disabled folks have no extra rights on a plane and that babies will always come first. I was stunned at this. Then comes the boarding and not once were people with mobility issues invited to preboard. So we were again seated in middle seating.	0
Economy on ZRH-DUS and DUS-AUH. The planes were new but considering this is a European airline why did they design the seats with so little legroom? Everyone suffered when the the person in front started to recline seats. Limited choice on inflight entertainment. The experience on both flights were horrible and we would never want to fly with this airline again. Avoid this airline at all cost.	0
I am a 1.8 million miler with Delta and have flown millions of miles with almost every Airline in the world in Economy Business and First Class. We recently paid $10000 for two Business Class Tickets from LAX to Dusseldorf with Air Berlin because we wanted to fly on the same air line as family members returning form a visit - never again Air Berlin. It took more than combined 14+ hrs on hold on the phone to confirm our flights. They never answers our various email complaint forms I filled out. Their business class seats are small just like Comfort Economy seat  even so the decline to a full bed but you may fall out when you turn around. Food is average and overall service ranges form very bad to average. Never again.	0
San Francisco to Manila via Beijing. I will never book my parents here again, due to their very poor service. My parents, 86 and 83, traveling from San Francisco to Manila with only a one hour layover at Beijing were left behind by the aircraft, this shouldn’t be a problem due to the fact that they were wheel chair assisted. Air China didn’t even bother trying to inform us. I tried calling their customer service but I waited for almost 2 hours. I understand the volume of callers, but 2 hours is more than enough to wait.his entire incident made everyone in my family worried having no contact of my parents and most importantly, of their current situation. At Beijing, although they were given hotel accommodation, they were never offered even a snack / meal. What added to the turmoil was that the flight supposedly from Beijing straight to Manila, was changed to Beijing, Japan, and Manila. Again for the second time, not a single word was heard from the airline.	0
Myself and 2 coworkers had to pay twice for a flight to Orlando and still havent received any compensation for tickets or the expenses of the delay. They lost our luggage for 3 days and refuse to cover any expenses from this.I was flying from Vancouver to Toronto for business and our connecting flight to Orlando in Toronto was delayed (not Air Canada's fault, but an airport issue). For almost 4 hours in the airport, Air Canada employees at the airport and via phone refused to speak to anyone on the delayed flights about what they should do.  We finally re-booked our flights for early the next morning and booked a hotel for the evening. When we woke up, Air Canada at around 1:00 AM rebooked our original flight to 6:00am - of course we didnt see this email so late at night so we foregoed that flight and went with the 8:30 we had already rebooked. Of course, we tried calling Air Canada to inform them of the switch but still no one was answering their phones. Our 8:30 was rescheduled to 12:00 and when we were able to leave, we asked our flight check-in attendant to scan our bag ticket to make sure our bags were on the correct plane, she assured us they most definitely were. No luggage once we arrive in Orlando. It took us three days to finally receive our luggage, all the while being treated incredibly poorly by rude and incompetent employees who took no responsibility for the inconvenience. We still haven't been refunded for anything, and all staff we deal with says there is nothing they can do.	0
Barcelona to Toronto. This was the most uncomfortable plane with the worst service and horrible food. No inflight entertainment screen provided. The flight attendants seemed irritated. Get it together, Air Canada. Step up the game a bit. At least clean the plane better between flights.	0
Grenada to Toronto. Upon boarding at Grenada they announced on the plane that there was a weight issue and they were "reloading the luggage for proper weight distribution". Upon arriving in Toronto we found out that meant they decided to leave our luggage behind and not tell us. Still no word on where our valuables are or when they will be returning. I understand that the plane needs to be in line with weight restrictions but inform your guests, offer the cost of the flight back or at least a discount.  The worst part is that they have failed to guarantee its return. At this point it may as well be lost luggage. In this case those pieces of luggage that are now unattended in grenada should be of the highest priority to return home, yet all agents we talk to seem incredibly unphased by this. Also after waiting at the carousel for an hour and finally going to customer service they nonchalantly told us it was left behind. No apology was given.  Also the aircraft is dated. No entertainment, tighter seating than any i have experienced before. Staff were rude and snappy.I will never fly air canada rouge or air canada in general again and will make sure to tell everyone i know about this experience.  Instead of coming home relaxed and happy we have had to spend hours of every day back since waiting for updates.	0
We were on a 10 hour flight from Bangkok to Moscow (connecting to Barcelona) which took off on time, but we somehow lost 1.5 hours in the air. Then about 20 of us missed our various connections by about 10 mins.  We then were told we'd have to stay overnight in a hotel. We waited around for 45+ minutes with no information or wifi to tell loved ones not to pick us up in Barcelona. We were finally escorted to a hotel with security guards and strict surveillance. We weren't allowed to leave the second floor without an escort. On top of that, everyone was rude and cold and only one man spoke English. The security guards spoke none, except for the one who could yell "go." The worst part is that they all made us share a room with a complete stranger even though several passengers tried to refuse. We also weren't allowed to have our checked luggage, so we had to sleep in a room with a stranger with next to nothing. We were then escorted to our flight the next morning though none of them spoke English and were incredibly rude and short. At passport control, I was screamed at in Russian for not showing my hotel voucher, of which no one ever told us to keep or show to anyone after the hotel. Finally another passenger translated for us and I was able to get through. The flight attendants also spoke minimal English and were far from kind. The entire experience was awful with no reprieve.	0
Geneva to Tokyo via Moscow with Aeroflot. My flight from Geneva to Moscow was 1.5 hours late, when I had 1.5 hours transit in Moscow, meaning I landed when my connecting flight was about to take off. I knew about the very short transit, therefore consulted the cabin attendant when I found out that the flight was delayed. To which I was told the connecting flight would wait for me and I would be guided to business class just before landing so that I could get off the flight early, in which case the transit would be smooth, and there will be ground staff assisting me the transit. All points was a total lie! They could have, and I do have experience with other flights that the departure time is delayed by 30 minutes or so for connecting passengers, however no such arrangement was made. Neither did they allow me to go to the front of the plane. Rather, I was moved twice to the rear end of the plane due to families wanting to sit together. On top of this, none of the ground crew were there to help me at all. Because of this, I was forced into staying 24 hours in Moscow in a hotel arranged by Aeroflot. But this is the crazy part. You stay in an airport hotel in a "special" floor where there are security guards so you cannot leave the hotel. You cannot even go to the common area of the hotel without a security guard behind your back. Basically, you are treated as a prisoner! 	0
This was my second time on AB after a short flight to Crete in 1997. To make a long story short - the 2 biggest issues were: The narrow space between the seats Ryanair has more space! That would be OK on a 2-3 hours flight but not 12 hours (TXL-AUH-HKT and back). Terrible. I am 1.88m and did not know how to sit. Customer service: I do not know if the flight attendants earn enough or have zero training because they have no idea about customer service. At the end of the day I do not care - I want the best service for my money and I have to say that I have never - and I have been to almost 80 countries - experienced such unprofessional often rude stewards. Two examples: I ordered special meals and on 2 of the 4 flights there were problems with it and the AB staff screamed the information about my special meal throughout the cabin. I went to the kitchen for a second beer. The lady gave me a lecture in a very rude undertone that the supplies have to suffice for the return flight from HKT to AUH as well. All this and more has never happened to me before. The result for me is: AB and AUH never ever again. AUH is a mess too - everything is totally unorganised and everything works like on a bazaar. I know DXB and DOH as well. DXB and EK are the best and I love to use them.	0
New York JFK to Beijing. On 25-NOV-2018, our flight got cancelled causing me and my group to miss a whole day of vacation in Thailand. The Airline did absolutely zero for us over 300$ in loss per person. Unacceptable. Our flight was at 2:30am and delayed until 12:30pm following day. We called the airline they had no information. We received no email what so ever notifying us of cancellation/delay. We sat at the airport for almost 10 hours with no direction from anyone. When we called again to ask for hotel accommodation (per airline policy of delay of 4+ hours) we were told we do not need a hotel. We have a member in my group with health issues, however, when mentioned to Customer Service they immediately dismissed this. At this point in time due to absolute negligence on behalf of this airline, we will never fly with them again.  Don't be deceived by the cheap price. The cheap price reflects in their sub par customer service which was evidently and successfully displayed by Air China personnel. They were rude and offensive.	0
San Francisco to Beijing. Our booking leaving from San Francisco was a total nightmare. We got to the counter to check in at 12:50 an hour before the departure time and there’s nobody there to check us in. Therefore we cannot get to the gate. We were there exactly an hour before departure which is still on the required time to check in for the flight. The counter personnel’s left their post prior to the time. Called the extension on the gate to get help but again personnel don’t answer their phone. We had called the 800 number of the airline which takes 2 hours to answer and no help was rendered to us by your company. The 3rd party agency tried the whole night to book us another trip using the remaining booking so we don’t purchase another ticket but Air China refused to help us. Instead they wants us to buy a more expensive ticket and charge us ton of money to get to our destination. The aggravation and frustration was unbearable. No one attempted to help. Besides we bit the bullet to just purchase a ticket but the process is long and complicated on hold for the reservation office for 2 hours and yet never get to reserve it.	0
San Francisco to Manila via Beijing. My connecting flight from Beijing to Manila on Oct 31, 2018, took off without notice. I was one of those passengers stranded in Beijing starving and cold. The money that was given to me is not enough to pay for the hotel room. I spent more than 12 hours in the airport I've missed a very important appointment the next day and it cost me handsomely. It was a very frustrating and exhausting flight and a very poor customer service.	0
Taipei to Beijing via Houston, we looked for a ticket not expensive and comfortable as we were traveling as a family with a 3 yrs old kid. I found that Air China was offering cheap ticket and transfer hotel accommodation at Beijing if your transfer time is over 7 hrs. Beijing is really cold in November at night even for adults, imagine the kids. We arrived Beijing at 00:30 for transfer and waited 1 hr in line for security check with a kid sleeping in my arms. Asked officers for priority line but none of them cared about us!! For transfer hotel you have to apply transfer visa which is an easy process i experienced before however this time the lady officer even without checking our passports carelessly and without expressing not even a little responsibility said I will not give you visa! Then i went to Air China desk, but they didnt even try a bit to help, we paid ourselves for hourly hotel to at least let baby sleep in warm. I never ever recommend Air China.	0
Mexico City to Toronto. I like travelling with Air Canada, but rouge is a stain to their name. No inflight screens on board, even for long flights, poor choice of food, Bad seating. I paid for a meal in my return flight that they didn’t even have on board. Only snacks. A 90 mins delay in flight, missed the connection. They couldn’t give me a flight until 9 hours later.	0
Montreal to Providenciales. Expected a lot more from Air Canada. Rouge aircraft is simply an assault on a person's personal space. I am 5'11" and I cannot sit in the seat unless my legs are wide open. Cramped and appallingly is how I would rate this seating configuration. This is the last time I travel with this carrier. Even if it is more expensive I will travel on another airline just to have the decency of legroom. Pathetic Air Canada, simply greedy and pathetic.	0
Aeromexico personnel at the airport are rude and incompetent, they feel that we are begging for a favor when we are the ones paying their salary, if you ever need a flight think twice before choosing Aeromexico. My kids arrived to the wrong gate, for thus reason they arrived 1 hr before their flight to the correct gate, they told the attendants their flight was soon to depart but they didn't do anything and had them wait in line which was going to depart at a later time. By the time they got to the counter it was late and they lost their flight, customer service couldn't do anything for us. We will try not to use this airline again.	0
Mexico City to Houston. The connecting flight from Mexico City, Aeromexico/Delta gave me & my fiancé a really bad experience. They did not assign gate numbers for their flights initially and when we asked staff around us for our gate number they kept giving us the incorrect one causing us to miss our first flight at 3 and had to have it changed to 8. So we sat in the airport for 12 hours because of misinformed staff. We spoke to a manager for Aeromexico who was very rude and snappy and kept telling us that we should have been at the right gate even when we explained to her that the rep gave us the wrong gate number. She didn’t care what we had to say and just told us that it would be $400 to change flights. Something told us to speak to another Supervisor and their happened to be a man who politely listened to us and understood that we did not intentionally miss our flight because of the misunderstandings and as a courtesy he had our flight changed. Downside was that the next flight was not until 8pm so we sat in the airport for 8 hours. Will not be flying through this company again.	0
San Luis to Tijuana via Mexico City. Aeromexico cancelled my reservation without any phone call, email, or text message. When I asked why or how this could have happened they had no explanation other than I should go to an airport and show my ID and card. Which I did, immediately but did not do any good. I had to re-buy the tickets but this time for $300 more than when I made the purchase 12 hours earlier. They have no live customer service that deals with billing issue, they have only an email team that didnt see anything wrong with what they did. I wonder how many other people they cancel on just to re-sell at a higher price.	0
Bogota to Seattle via Mexico City. I purchased a ticket for my brother so he could come to the USA. I used my credit card to purchase the ticket. The next day I received an email from AeroMexico saying that I had to drive 2 hours to the airport to show them my identification. I contacted my credit card and was informed that they had approved the transaction. Turns out AeroMexico has a third party system that randomly flags charges and denies them and there is no way to override it. This is obviously a company from a developing country as this would never happen in a US company.	0
Aegean Airlines have updated their charges for sporting equipment, skis in particular. The first set of skis used to be free with the purchased ticket, but from now on it costs 50 euros per trip. I consider these charges ridiculous, this is something I would expect from Ryanair or a similar low budget airline.	0
Amsterdam to Hartford via Dublin. Flying business class and they lost my suitcase. Claiming your suitcase and contacting the missing baggage department is handled somewhere in India (call center). Total not capable people who answering like robots. Compensation, never heard of and irritation to the top on my side. Cheap, amateurish and no service at all when you want to find out where your suitcase is when you call, sent mails etc. I want to have compensation for my ruined one week stay in the USA.	0
New York to Hong Kong via Beijing. Disgraceful service and attitude. Avoid this airline. Flight: 13 Oct 2:30am, JFK-Hong Kong, CA990. Due to unexpected transport problems (incredibly, NY JFK's Airtrain system broke down, leaving us stranded onboard), I arrived at the Air China check-in desk exactly one hour before the flight. However, the staff had already closed the check-in desk (there was literally just one person left, closing down computers etc) and they would not let me check-in. The rules state check-in closes one hour before the flight, but the Air China staff had clearly closed the counter before that cut-off time. There were around 20 passengers left stranded due to being stranded on the airport's airtrain shuttle, but Air China made no attempt to help. In fact, the staff were completely indifferent. Air China refused to refund the money and would only allow us on a later flight if we paid the fare difference in full - which was several thousand dollars. I had to cancel my trip. I advise you never to buy tickets with Air China. If everything goes as planned you might be fine but if there are any unexpected problems, Air China has no interest in helping and will be completely inflexible. Choose a better airline that Air China, one with reasonable customer service, one that solves problems rather than simply waving away passengers in need.	0
Lisbon to Tampa via Toronto. Never again. Air Canada Rouge is possibly the worst airline I have every flown. I checked my bag in Lisbon to be told there was a fee which I paid. I asked if my bag could be checked to Tampa - no. I had to pick up my bag in Toronto and recheck it for my flight to Tampa. I had to pay a 2nd baggage fee. My bag cost $120 dollars to fly on the same booking. The aircraft was very old and uncomfortable, very dirty, with no in-flight entertainment. You have to download their app which didn't work. They had devices to rent but ran out about the 3rd row from the top. Food was disgusting and I found the cabin crew to be unhelpful, rude and very badly mannered. Fly with any other airline if you have a choice.	0
Fort Lauderdale to Toronto. Rouge flights in economy - seats, space and service are awful! On April 7, I was rescheduled from a super 8 aircraft and was put on a rouge flight. So cramped that, at barely five feet tall, my knees touched the seat ahead - no room to put a small bag under the seat. The staff were rude when I asked for help to put my bag in the bin above. Today I am travelling again. I had no choice with the airline, but used points for an upgrade. This time in rouge business- I expect the same lousy seats and service. Air Canada prmised lower priced service with rouge - reduced costs considerably but never adjusted the price. It is as costly as a regular Air Canada flight.	0
I reserved and paid for a Premium Economy seat about 4 months before the flight. The night before I was to fly I called Aeroflot to reconfirm, and was told that she couldn't confirm my reservation and that I would have to check in with the NY Aeroflot office when it opened at 9AM the next morning. The flight was scheduled to leave at 11:50 AM. No explanation, no apology, no nothing. Fortunately the agency that had made the original reservation has a 24/7 help line, and the agent I spoke to there was able to discover that the plane I was booked to fly on had no seating configuration for Premium Economy. The only seating choices were Economy or Business - this from the airline that had accepted a reservation and payment for a Premium Economy seat 4 months before. I have no problem with airlines having to change equipment, but I think it's fair to expect them to notify affected passengers about changes in the seating configuration. If I hadn't called, Aeroflot would have sprung this on me at the airport, when my only choices would have been to accept the downgrade to Economy or upgrade to Business for an additional $3K+. Instead I cancelled the reservation and rebooked Economy on Finnair, where at JFK I was able to purchase a Premium Economy upgrade on one segment for 60 Euros, and where I got a free upgrade to Business Class on another. I booked Aeroflot originally because I had heard that they had substantially improved their inflight services, and perhaps that it still true. Since I never got on the flight, I wouldn't know. And I never will; because of their unbelievably incompetent reservation services, I'll never try to fly them again.	0
Vancouver to Havana via Mexico city. I was late 15 mins for check-in and there was at least 40 min. for me to go for boarding and people in the office said I was too late and didn't want to help. When i called customer service they said they need to charge no show up fee, Fare difference and another penalty so the total was like 600 CAD for the next flight. But new flight ticket was almost the same price. All I asked was at least the cancellation of no show up fee or the refund but they said it is non refundable. I asked if i could use the return but again I was told no. So they made me pay the whole ticket price.	0
Mexico City to Toronto. Aeromexico is a mess. Oversold flights, departure delays. They charge even if is their error. Hidden cost and a total lack of care of their customers. I’m a Sky Priority at Aeromexico, I cant choose any other airline to fly inside Mexico. So i know really well that Aeromexico is a dishonest airline.	0
Guadalajara to Sacramento. This is our 2nd time flying Aeromexico. Last year was a complete disaster with the flight that was supposed to leave SMF 2315 and land in GDL 0515, instead leaving SMF st 0530! The entire nite we were given zero info/updates and only once offered a drink. The shops were closed, and my husband, is a diabetic controlled by diet so needs to est every 2 hours when awake. No employee would help us. Our return trip last year was 3 hours late. I am usually a glass half full type of person, so when this years annual trip to visit family was being planned I decided to give Aeromexico another chance. The dates/times/prices were the most convenient so we decided to give it another try. We never entered a complaint last year. This year our trip to GDL was uneventful. But the return trip we encountered the ticket agent from hell. We were never notified that the weight per luggage piece had been changed, and the carry on that should have been free, was 2 kilos overweight. Under then new guidelines, our 2 large luggage pieces were a combined 10 kilos underweight. We usually pay $25 each for the large luggage. At the GDL terminal u go thru the first line, then are given a piece of paper, have to go to a 2nd area, wait in line to pay for ur luggage, then return to the first line provide ur receipt and get ur ticket, not very convenient or fast) nothing was said by the ticket agent about overweight luggage, but when I went to pay I found I was going to be charged $114 for the carry on, which was 2 kilos over by the new guidelines. I pointed out that our total was still 8 kilos under, and that we were never notified of revised guidelines to no avail. I refused to pay, saying I would rather move 2 kilos to another suitcase. I was told to return to original ticket person and that he would return our luggage so we could make the changes. When i returned and told him what I wished to do, he put all 3 pieces of luggage on the conveyor where it automatically rolled to the back, gave us a paper with UPC codes, and told us we could get our luggage back "down the hall". I asked him numerous times where down the hall and he refused to say more. We looked "down the hall" to no avail, and no other Aeromexico employee were helpful. We finally asked a Volaris employee who walked us to an area that we would never have found. It took almost an hour to get the luggage returned. We adjusted the weight, and then had to wait in the LONG ticket line starting the entire process all over. It's a good thing we always arrive early for our flights! When we got to ticket counter again, the carry on was .03 over. The ticket agent was prepared to start the whole have to pay for this deal again. I pointed out that the total was still 8 kilos under and her response was "and what does that have to do with anything? " I quickly removed 1 pair of socks which put it at 9.90 kilos, under the magic 10 kilos. We have continually encountered employees for Aeromexico that are rude, unhelpful, and basically convey a could-care-less attitude. The only time Aeromexico seems to shine is when you are actually on the plane. The stewards are great. Excluding a very rough landing at SMF (bounced several times before finally staying down) the in air experience is great! Unfortunately that does not compensate enough for the issues you deal with while on the ground. Obviously last year was not  a flux, we will not fly Aeromexico again!!!	0
Dublin to Gatwick. I have a shoulder injury and find it difficult to put even a lightweight bag up into the overhead locker. I asked a young male cabin crew member to assist me and he refused. Furthermore he told be he had a back problems which I am surprised he shared and in an "I dont want to help you" way. I responded - Ok I will wait for assistance and he just walked away. Another passenger when asked kindly helped me. I was shocked at his attitude to customer service and lack of concern or interest. I will not be choosing this airline again.	0
New York to Mumbai via Beijing. The food provided on-board is not up to the mark specially for long routes.I had Experienced the worst part from New York when the air China Airport authority is not sure whether we will get our connecting flight and the have to put the baggage destination of the next airport (Beijing) and before we reach the airport the flight attendant informs we are getting our connecting flight and when we get down and ask for our checked in baggage there is no one to respond on the airport when it is their home airport. Then one of the staff tells we would send it to Mumbai airport and when we land at Mumbai airport the Air China Staff tells we will send the baggage at home and the cost required for the material for your upcoming days would be compensated to you once you send us the bills. And when finally our bags come after 3 days we find half of our luggage missing and when we claim the company wont reply. This Airline is pathetic and I would never recommend anybody to travel by this airline. Regarding the staff support, Airline food, customer relation this airline has negative marking and most deteriorated services ever experienced.	0
Flew Air China from Tokyo to Beijing. Very slow and complicated checkin process. Poor customer service, they did not explain transit process in Beijing nor provide us with necessary transit forms. No customer service persons to help on arrival at Beijing. As a result of their poor service missed connecting flight. Have tried to contact airline numerous times, they refuse to discuss or reply to emails.	0
Horrible experience. They over booked the flight from Montreal to Punta Cana. My wife couldn't even get confirmed until last minute. Even though we booked our trip 2 months before. Never got to sit with her. Entertainment never worked. Ran out of food for passengers. Food was bad. Some staff were nice, but most were rude. Never fly with Air Canada rouge again. Would rate zero out of 10 but have to give a 1 minimum.	0
Montego Bay to Toronto. My husband and I have decided not to fly with Air Canada anymore. Hour and half late departing Montego bay Jamaica no snacks just a beverage for a 4 hour flight which turned into a six and a half hours flight. We sat on the tarmac for an hour and a half waiting to unboard the flight. With little or no updates until people were showing signs of frustration no offer of a complimentary drink or snack. When we landed we were told we would be off in 10 to 15mins which was a lie, it was an hour and a half later. With the seat belts sign on we were not allow to use the washroom for over an hour.  No consideration towards their customers they seems to be taking away more every time we fly. They only allow the small carry on for free. Every check bag you have to pay for..	0
Mexico City to Montreal. Aeromexico has the worst customer service I have ever encountered. Because of their negligence, I missed my return flight and then they insisted I pay for a new flight. It was my first trip to Mexico, and at no point was I told I would need the immigration paper they gave me on arrival to leave the country. They did not ask if I had it when I checked in, or at any point until I was boarding the plane. The immigration paper was in my checked bag, which they had enough time to remove, and make me buy a new ticket, but not to let me get another immigration paper. I asked the Aeromexico manager how many times a day this happens to people she said oh MANY. Then isn’t this a problem, I said, couldn’t Aeromexico check for this paper when the other documents are checked, at check in? She rudely said this was not their problem. In fact, Aeromexico makes a lot of money off this- if as she says many people a day encounter this and they do nothing to fix the issue.	0
Mexico City to Boston. Went on a girls trip the last week of April to Cabo flying into Mexico City via AeroMexico. Getting there no problem we all arrived all of our baggage arrived. However our leave date we are sitting waiting to board our flight the is to board and leave at 3:10pm. Another girlfriend and I are told we need to go to immigration to get the card we were given when we arrived ok no problem we have time before our flight leaves, however how about its told to every one flying into the Country that that slip is needed to get out, and how about the cost if it needs replacing? Give me a break there are all these procedures to get in and out of places I bet its not hard to verify who we are and where we are going or coming from. With that said we return to our gate at 3:00pm to learn our flight has left, its not supposed to leave until 3:10pm we learn we were not paged at all nor were any finally boarding calls made for this flight the customer service after this was absolutely horrendous! You are an international airport not one of your employees cared to apologize that our flight was gone nor did anyone care to speak English to help us everyone was pointing us in every other way, we were told there would be no flights until the next day. We then go to the AeroMexico counter where we encounter another rude employee who tells us there is nothing he can do but we can check with Delta so we go over to delta and he says all i can tell you is we have another flight but you need to get AeroMexico to change yours, so we go back to AreoMexico to try and explain what Delta has said, him not understanding. So we go back over to Delta and explain what AeroMexico says and that he will not go over and talk to him so Delta gets up and goes over to AeroMexico returns to us to say we now have 10 minutes to go to international baggage claim and get back to get this flight because our bags were removed from the flight. So we do not get back within 20 mins trying to get back to the correct place to book a new flight was shit because not one of your employees knew or understood English, we finally get to where we need to be and again we are told there are no flights. Then we are told its going to cost us a pretty penny to book a new flight home. So now we are in the process of trying to get reimbursed which is again hell.	0
There was fog at the destination airport and two or three flights before us, due to leave at 10.00 local time, were cancelled for this shuttle service. The screens never posted cancelled or delayed in any flight including ours two hours later. The screens only posted "Gate open". There were some weather announcements. In the end there was this: "Flight so and so is cancelled. Click". No information, no apologies (Aegean is by excellence the no excuses airline, have had other similar experience in the past) but worst of all, there was no info or any guidance as to what to do with our travel plans, our tickets, some sort of minimum empathy or a minor sample of the infamous Greek hospitality, Aegean claims to be the carrier of.	0
Flying Air Berlin OLB-TXL. Plane in a good condition and clean. Cabin attendants however very unpleasant and seemed just to wait to finish the job. Sandwich with cheese of very bad quality. Hope not to be in situation to fly them again.	0
After using United for many years on my trips from the US to Berlin I was excited to try Air Berlin. The fare was more than UA but I decided to try them. Mistake! The crew on my ORD to TXL flight seemed interested only in getting the service over with ASAP. The food was terrible and served ungraciously. The seats are hard and more cramped than on UA (I did not opt to pay extra for an XXL seat since I'm 5'2 and weigh 98lbs I didn't think I needed it). On my return TXL to ORD the fight experience a mechanical problem resulting in a 2 hr delay. The ground staff made an unintelligible announcement and then retreated behind a glass partition where no one could ask them anything. Again on board service was without a single smile. Same terrible presentation and lacklustre service. I will not be using Air Berlin again.	0
Beijing to New York JFK. I would not recommend this airline to anyone. They were careless enough to lose my baggage not only once but twice. The first time was at least city to city and now it was to a different country and they have no record of my luggage although my entire tour group and I witnessed them putting the tag on for JFK in check in. There hasn’t been anyone helpful during this situation as all my personal items whereabouts are unknown. The food was no good and there was very bad turbulence half of the ride. It’s one thing to lose someone’s luggage once, but twice is ridiculous!	0
Los Angeles to Tokyo via Beijing. Worst airline I have been on. If you are over 6 feet tall you will be miserable and there is nothing you can do. I would never fly with them for several reasons but the fact that they screwed up my itinerary then charged me 800 dollars was the main reason. Its hard finding someone who speaks english. The food was horrible and the seating is very small. I wish I would have read the reviews before I booked.	0
I flew Air China business class for the first time. I thought being part of star alliance they would be good. I land in Bombay and was told that the bag containing all my clothes was in Beijing and would come the next day. I was connecting to Bangalore and requested they deliver to Bangalore. After 4 days of calling and getting the runaround, I was told that the bag was found and would arrive the next day which is the day I was coming back to the US. Basically I got my bag 2 hours before my return flight. I had to buy clothes, toiletries and all the meetings were pretty much ruined. Also my bag was completely broken. Since the time I have come back I have called and asked for compensation and I was told to submit all details to their Los Angeles center. I did that and since then I have been emailing and calling to follow up and nobody has any answer.  No more Air China. The fare was $1000 cheaper than United but not worth it.	0
St. Lucia to Toronto. I’m unimpressed and disappointed. I wanted comfort on my way home and I wasn’t given it. I didn’t get the preferred seating (I get it, it’s not guaranteed) however, to be told I need to pay for my food by the flight attendant when I payed for it previously. My flight was delayed and I didn’t buy food in the airport because I was expecting to be fed. I have contacted the company and “in goodwill” they will only give me a 20% off my next flight. Which is insulting because I will never fly with them. They won’t do anything for me and “will continue to work hard on improving their customer service. I was ripped off and lied to. Do not fly with them. Do not get economy plus. There are way better air lines out there.	0
Toronto to Orlando. The plane was filthy. Delays with retrieving a baggage from under a plane for a passenger who did not make the flight along with the plane loosing power (no lights or air) on the taxi way caused a 3 hour delay before take off. After landing in Orlando 3.5 hours late, the door to the baggage compartment was "frozen shut" resulting in a 4 hour delay at baggage claim. Absolutely no communication from Air Canada once on the ground. We landed at 2:50am and luggage did not arrive until 6:45am. I wrote a complaint and was told I will be contact within 52 business days. Customer service is non existent.	0
Dublin to Boston. There was a booking error on our return trip. Customer representative charged 4 of us more than double the original round-trip price for the return change, telling us that this was the best we would get, take it now or leave now. We took it, and upon checking, we could have saved on Aer Lingus if we had left the return as it was and just booked a separate flight. In my over 55 years of flying different airlines, I have never been treated so unfairly.	0
Dublin to Dusseldorf. Weather was bad. Checked on Flightaware and Aer Lingus website. Both said plane was on time for 5:30pm Departure. At 6:15 were told departure 6:45. Started boarding plane. At 7pm flight was cancelled when half of passengers had already boarded aircraft. Communication after that was atrocious. Not sure whether flight was cancelled due to crew working hours limit. Passengers spoke individually to Gate Staff and asked them to communicate over the intercom to the whole group which they wouldn't do. No written communication was given. Issues which had to be resolved without any guidance from Aer Lingus were a) How to rebook to a later flight (24 hours later earliest available) b) How to exit airport as we had passed through passport control c) Where to get our bags d) Accomodation options e) Compensation options according to EU law No food vouchers or accomodation vouchers were given. Tried to ring Aer Lingus at 3am hoping it would be quiet. Was put on hold for 30 mins with no indication of when call would be answered. Filled in a complaint form on their website. Response was "A member of our Guest Relations team will review your request and personally reply to you within the next 60 business days" That's almost 3 months. Aer Lingus has to do some serious work in the customer relations area if they don't want to go out of business. As this would be a semi regular occurence it would have been helpful to get a handout showing what to do and covering a-e above.  A good airline is one that handles the situation rather than abandoning their passengers when a flight is cancelled	0
Amsterdam to Miami via Dublin. Due to the storm our flight was delayed several hours. My friend and I had a travel time over 30 hours. The Aer Lingus Customer Service Desk had only 1 person behind the counter when the incident happened and other 5-6 counters were empty for several hours. The managers told us that the Customer Service desk will be closed at 8pm, and there was nothing Aer Lingus can do at the moment. It would appear to have been more helpful if the managers took charge and provided a solution, looked for solutions, or provided some helpful constructive customer service. We were given breakfast tickets and were later told that the breakfast ticket was unusable in other venues and only usable by the cafe, which claimed to open 24 hours but didn’t have any food for us and Aer Lingus had closed already. So we also used our own money later to buy snacks. Then we found out that there was a difference between a meal ticket (which was apparently able to be used at any restaurant/supermarket in the airport) and a breakfast ticket (which was only to be used at the cafe). Since we connected the flight from Amsterdam to Dublin early AM, the entire day we were with Aer Lingus. Nothing was done, every response from our were questions were brushed off with unhelpful response. I believe this airline failed to remember the fact the only food they provided was a pack of cookies, therefore we couldn’t use the tickets and was given only 1 pack of water. I would like to highlight that this complaint is to the fact that Aer Lingus did not provide solutions nor notify us of the differences between the 2 tickets. I do not think I will ever fly with this airline again, I understand that weather conditions affected the flight patterns and caused delay but the customer service was horrible. The employees behind the ticketing booths and the managers were all very rude and accepted no responsibilities.	0
Our Aer Lingus flight from Ireland to Boston was cancelled due to "technical issues." They re-scheduled our flight to go from Ireland to New York JFK airport and then another flight to Boston airport. Due to the longer flight, we missed our connecting flight home to Denver. Now its 8pm and no flights out until 9am the next morning. My wife has bronchitis and a horrible cough. I asked them to help us with a hotel for the night and they said, "There is nothing we can do." Cheapest hotel is $400/night. So, now my poor wife is sleeping the night in a chair at Boston airport! They are very willing to take your money but not willing to take responsibility when they blow it. They were completely responsible for us missing our connecting flight home.  Heartless airline company. Never fly them again and I would highly suggest you consider your choices. Aer Lingus is horrible.	0
EY1996 AUH-HKT June 4th. Absolutely appalling customer service from the very rude and miserable "flight attendants" cramped seats awful food. We were given a (what they called) sandwich which was half the size of the palm of my hand and bottle of water this constituted a 'meal' just woeful. The people who run this airline should be embarrassed to be associated with this below par sub standard outfit. Never again. If Ryan Air flew > long haul I'd rather go with them.	0
Beijing to Shanghai. Worst experience ever had with an airline.  Totally irresponsible and rude to customers! My hands are shaking so much now with anger. I purchased a ticket this morning from Air China counter for a flight going from Beijing to Shanghai this afternoon. From Shanghai onwards, I’m to catch an international flight booked with another Airline. I’ve booked my Air China ticket ensuring there is around 3 hours transit time in Shanghai. Having been to Shanghai Airport many times before, I know that 3 hours is more than sufficient time for transit even with one hour delay from previous flight.  Firstly the attendant who sold me the ticket reassured me there will be no delay with the flight today. The flight was meant to depart 14:30pm, at 14:00pm there was an announcement saying the flight is delayed due to air traffic control and Air China staff refused to advise passengers the new flight time. At 17:00pm here I am sitting at the airport, flight is delayed almost 3 hours and flight still hasn’t departed. I contacted Air China, I asked them if there’s anyway they can compensate me because now I have definitely missed my next flight, as well as my hotel for the next night in Tokyo, the 3 day trip I booked from Tokyo. The answer is no, it’s your own fault, also reason provided now is that Air China won’t make compensation for weather related delays (how funny now they change the reason of delay from airport traffic to weather while it’s a clear sunny windless here in Beijing, they lied outright because they know they are not liable for weather related delays. Regardless of the fact many other similar flights by other airlines have departed on time today. So now I’m $2,000 out of pocket, tired, frustrated and angry and I need book another flight to Tokyo later which will add more to my expenses. I cannot believe the fact when they apologise for one minute delays in public transport in Japan while Air China lies to avoid responsibility of a delay from their own doing (who knows what the truth is). I’m absolutely done with this company and will never travel with them again.	0
Old, tired plane. Out of 3 washrooms, 1 washroom not working, one washroom had no water for sink. Long line up for washrooms throughout the flight, difficult for anyone to use the isle. Uncomfortable seats, extremely cramped, to the point that with the seat in front slightly inclined one does not have room to open up a laptop. Flight was full so carry-on luggage was scattered everywhere on board - in the case of an emergency no one would ever get out in any kind of reasonable time. Not that clear from the Air Canada website how entertainment system would work - has changed (for the worse) from last Rouge flight (2 years ago). On the plus side, the fight left on time and the landing was very smooth. I would not recommend Rouge for any flight over 2 hours, it is just too uncomfortable.	0
Air Canada rouge from Toronto to Jamaica. Just a horrible experience. Over 2.5 hour delay onboard with a toddler. The flight crew keep lying saying it will be a few minutes but it’s been over 2.5 hours. I will never fly Air Canada ever again. The seating hasn’t been cleaned for a very long time and there is dry old food on the seating tray. Maybe clean the plane once in a while.	0
Las Vegas to Montreal via Toronto. I have upgraded to business class on every flight I have taken on many different airlines and never had service as bad as we had on this flight. We upgraded 24 hours before, as I always do, and once in the plane, all they gave us was a bag of peanuts telling us that we cannot get food since we upgraded at the airport and it's too last minute to provide food (which was wrong). I know the upgrade details mentioned that we might not get the business class meal for free, but why were we not offered it for purchase, as we saw people in coach purchasing that same meal (which was for purchase on their inflight menu). Once we asked, the hostess became very rude and told us well have more drinks! Besides, the seats were way less comfortable than any other airline, especially Air Canada. So be careful when purchasing your tickets if you care at all about comfort because you will not get it, no matter how much you pay on Rouge.	0
Lima to Montreal. It is immoral of Air Canada to use this such an airplane for a long night flight over 8 hours. We were extremely uncomfortable, there was no entertainment and little service. The staff tells you to download the Air Canada Rouge application once on the plane when, if you are not from the country, likely you have no connection to download anything.	0
Bogota to Calgary via Mexico City. I have traveled on a number of national carrier, and AeroMexico indeed earns the review as the worst airline in the world! I arrived at Bogota's El Dorado airport for a 7:57am flight to Calgary, Canada, checked-in and received my boarding pass, cleared security, and headed to Gate 48 as was indicated on my boarding card. At 7:50am I learned that the proper gate was in fact 48A, which was separate from where my waiting area was at Gate 48. I never received any page over the intercom, and was  unaware of the difference in areas. After sprinting downstairs to Gate 48A on a mezzanine level I learned from another El Dorado Airport staff member not affiliated with AeroMexico (but still useless) that the boarding had closed and I had effectively missed my departure. I spent the next 30 minutes trying to track down an actual AeroMexico representative at which time I was told that the error was completely my fault, and that the best that AeroMexico could do was offer me it's "deepest regret" at my problem. The Bogota AeroMexico representative offered no solutions and ultimately took me to their back office in the airport where she proceeded to close a large door in my face, hide like a coward along with the rest of her colleagues, and summon security to escort me back to the main departure hall so that they could carry on with their day removed from my issue. Ultimately I had to book $1,500 worth of flights on United Airlines and linger around El Dorado for 16 hours before leaving on a 1:15am departure the next morning. AeroMexico has no interest in providing solutions to traveler problems has no interest in acknowledging their error even in spite of overwhelming evidence including official boarding passes stating the correct gate, AeroMexico website screenshots for the flight showing the same gate information as my boarding card even two hours after departure, and pictures of two entirely different locations (see attached) and is entirely focused on taking your money and reservation and then letting you navigate your way through their processes without any assistance and at your own peril. Save your time, save your money, save your effort and sanity, and book your travels to Central and South America with any other airline if you can, even if the number of connections and time to arrive at your desired destination is longer, as dealing with AeroMexico is a textbook lesson in business incompetence.	0
Glasgow to Dublin. The check in and flight itself was good. On time and reasonable. I am a cyclist and scientist and traveling for conference and training. I booked and paid for a bicycle. However, on return my bicycle carry box was damaged externally. I have had no offer of acceptance/not of liability, letter etc. When home (Glasgow), the bike frame had be damaged, which would have required a heavy force e.g. dropped form back of plane, heavy baggage dumped on top etc. The frame was unridable and needed replacing. I fly about 40 flights a year and have done for over 5 years with bike in this format with zero issues (mainly Air New Zealand and other Star Alliance carriers). OK. so occasionally some handling error may occur, this is life. However, I called, wrote, filled out online forms as recommended by AerLIngus. Replies were short and noted "please wait out team is reviewing it". I followed up 9 times over 2 months and still no response. I have now moved to my travel insurer for recovery of damage costs. Aer Lingus' baggage-ralated customer services is appalling 0.5 out of 10. It left a very sour taste and I would not travel Aer Lingus again nor can recommend this airline. If you do value your baggage and must travel with this poor airline, ensure you have it fully insured. reading other comments here, the airline has a baggage handling issue to sort out. Cheers.	0
Terrible customer service, rude and unhelpful. Flew Dublin to New York (Aer Lingus) and New York onto Las Vegas (jetblue) on 2 July. Bags never left Dublin until the 10 July and never received any bag for entire holiday. Supposedly bag arrived in Las Vegas sometime after this. On return to Dublin tried to trace bag whereabouts and was told by Aer Lingus that despite their mistake they would take no responsibility for the bag or helping find it and that it was jet blues issue, in saying this they were incredibly rude and unhelpful. Jet blue have then said they returned the bag from Las Vegas to Aer Lingus and said contact them to return it to Ireland. Now Aer Lingus refuse to say anything other then contact jetblue, but jetblue saying Aer Lingus have the bag! This is going on for 2 months and the time and money gone into trying to get bag back, nothing about the ruined holiday or the cost of additional clothing on holiday. At least jetblue try to help and have good customer service. Aer Lingus are just so rude and unhelpful and it was their mistake! Never flying with them again.	0
Chicago to Amsterdam via Dublin. My flight was cancelled and staff handled it very poorly, no one received anything. They gave us a sheet of paper with the wrong number/number that didn't exist. After asking around and searching their website we had to call a phone line that took 4+ hours to talk to someone and had a choice between rescheduling the next flight with them which was two days out or refund of the cancelled flight which means you have to pay expensive last minute flights with other airlines.	0
Air Berlin business class from Los Angeles to Berlin in May 2014. The first thing I noticed about Air Berlin business class: It's cramped. Very cramped. Air Berlin tries to sell the head-high dividers between its business class seats as "even more privacy" "even more isolation" and so on but in reality these are just flimsy plastic screens that fail to disguise the fact that Air Berlin has taken away about half the width of a "normal" business class seat and inserted another seat which is recessed so the other passenger's feet are sticking into your space. They manage to cleverly disguise this in their advertising by depicting only isolated seat units. In Air Berlin business class the feet of the person in the recessed seat next to you are a few inches away separated by a flimsy shaky plastic screen cutting into your space. The person in front of you is also recessed with their head sticking into your space. Air Berlin's plastic seat divider is - inexplicably - cut low in the back with the effect of exposing the top of your head if lower your back rest. If you recline and the person "behind you" (remember they're only half-way recessed) doesn't they're breathing on your scalp. If the person behind you coughs a lot - as happened to me - you're either coughed on the head a lot or you simply can't recline. This is exactly the kind of annoyance one pays to avoid in business class. In addition to significantly reduced width the seats are very short. I'm 185cms (6'1") and I could only "lie down" with my knees pulled up toward my chest. On my right the armrest was about four inches thick. On my left it was exactly the width of my index finger (not an exaggeration) and it was squeaky and wobbly (hard to believe but true). The in-flight entertainment is good with a solid noise-cancelling headset provided. The 15" screen is decent and operated via a remote with a mouse-like controller that works reasonably well but which your mother will not learn to use in a 100 years. The entertainment selection is limited. There were a few new movies but most of the selection was old stuff. There is a power outlet and a USB outlet. Storage is a problem. There is a compartment with cheap carpeting under the ottoman a pouch for magazines and rather small overhead compartments. Except for the medium-sized table there are no surfaces. Every business class passenger has - a few inches from their face - a strange UFO-looking contraption that turns out to be a combination of reading light and "night light." One can't help thinking this must be a case of designers gone insane. These units are unnecessary because there already is a reading light in the ceiling and ugly and cheap-looking producing the palest "night light" you could imagine. The food is pretty bad. Decent alcoholic beverages and snacks are available at any time. The flight attendants try pretty hard but they can't make up for the failings and cheapness of the cabin. They're nice but they'll throw you out of the kitchen immediately if you try to get up and stretch your legs a little. This shouldn't even be called "business class." It's more of a glorified economy class plus.	0
Phuket to Abu Dhabi. Most uncomfortable seat and with the smallest leg room I've ever experienced. Knees where wedged against the seat in front of me the entire flight and I'm only 5'11". They had to have the guy in front of me put his seat forward when serving the meals just to fit the food trays in. Entertainment and movie selection was laughable with nothing even remotely current. I know this is a low cost carrier but Ryanair is more comfortable that Air Berlin. Spend a few extra dirham and go with any other carrier than Air Berlin.	0
Flyer beware! I recently booked a flight through OneWorld Alliance-American Airlines. I received the confirmation email stating clearly a 2 baggage allowance. I arrived to the airport with an extra bag which I was prepared to pay for. The check in desk refused to acknowledge the baggage allowance in the confirmation email and preceded to charge my card for all the bags. The card was swiped several times as the agent said the charge would not go through. At this point I opted not to take the flight due to the excessive cost (550 Euro) and left with all my bags. I checked my account today only to discover that $412 USD has been taken from my account from AirBerlin. As I did not approve these charges I do not have a receipt. I attempted to call AirBerlin but was not able to get a human being on the phone.	0
Los Angeles to Bombay via Beijing. Worst airline ever. The flight from LAX  to Beijing on July 11th 2018 at 2:30 PM was cancelled and I was ordered to wait 24 hours for next flight and sent to a motel in LA. Later in the evening a customer service representative from Air China called me to say that they cannot book me for next day instead I have to wait for three more days due to complications with my connecting flight from Beijing to Bombay. She refused to cancel my ticket asking me to talk to my ticket agent. She also refused to confirm the flight cancellation (from LA to Beijing on 7/11/2018) and the website was showing the flight to be regular and not cancelled (although, all 300 passengers were accommodated in motels, etc.). My travel agent tried to contact several times but no air-china customer was taking the call even after 40 minutes wait on the phone. My electronic complaint to air china was responded with a web address/phone-number to talk to where no one picks up phone. I spent another $1000.00 to purchase a ticket through Delta airlines to go to Bombay. I am travelling internationally for over 35 years now and have traveled in many airlines. Based on the customer service, stone-walling any questions and for pure lying on their website and information centers, no one can beat air-china for the worst airline award. It is now four weeks I am trying to connect to someone there who would at least apologize but hey they don't consider anyone humans. My advise, better spend extra $100+ and book in one of the reliable airlines.	0
Stockholm to Manila via Beijing. Worst customer service ever! Would not recommend this airline and will I never fly with Air China again! - lost our baggage and nobody cared to search for it - six months later we have not recieved the compensation (although it has been promised to sent to us months ago) Every little move and step with them takes months. Nobody did not care to call back and check if baggage was recieved or not. I have never seen this bad customer service.. this is definitely a next level for a bad customer service!! If you want to save your time and nerve cells just don't choose Air China!	0
Montreal to Hong Kong via Beijing. Our flight from Montreal on May 19th departed at 4:00pm, 10 minutes earlier than the  departure time of 4:10pm. We had a connecting flight in Beijing on May 20th  at 6:30pm on flight and was supposed to be landing at 5:00pm however the plane only landed at 5:50 pm in Beijing. Due to this delay we missed our connecting flight to due the poor customer service from Air China at Beijing airport. When we arrived at the Beijing airport we were able to see that the were doing a last call however nothing was done to communicate to hold the plane for us and for other passengers that were supposed to be on that flight as well. This was the first time that we had flown with Air China and was the worst experience. We stayed in Beijing airport trying to figure out what to do until 9pm where we were told that we are getting a hotel to stay for the night with a meal included and will be catching a flight the next morning at 8am. We had taken a bus that brought us to a hotel which was the worst hotel ever in my life. Is this how you treat customers? We went into the restaurant hoping for a good meal after all of this terrible customer service and making us miss our flight. We were presented with a buffet that was the most disgusting food ever and with nothing to drink. Once we got into our room it smelled rotten and the bed was like sleeping on a piece of wood. The next day we went back to the airport to catch our flight and arrived in Hong Kong only to find out that one of our luggages is missing and that it was still in Beijing and the other luggage was damaged with one of the wheels broken which I had to purchase another luggage($150). We ended up getting the missing luggage delivered to us 12 hours later and found out that the luggage was damaged as well with the handle on the side ripped off. This is ridiculous and the customer service that Air China provides is way below standard and is a joke. On our way back from Japan on June 7th at Haneda airport, when checking in, we had asked for an upgrade to Premium economy for the flight CA879 from Beijing to Montreal and they agent had told us that the do not do upgrades and we would need to do it in Beijing when we catch our connecting flight. Once we got to gates in Beijing they told us that they do not do upgrades either. Customers looking to upgrade their seats and give Air China more money are turned down.  That being said, overall this is the worst experience I have ever witnessed from an airline.	0
I flew on Air Canada from Calgary to Las Vegas last December 28, 2018. I checked-in one luggage and had no carry on with me since it was a direct flight I didn't feel the need to bring a carry-on bag since all my things could fit in my checked-in luggage. I paid the baggage fee and checked-in earlier to make sure that I won't miss my flight. As soon as I passed through security I found out that my flight was delayed so I had no choice but to wait for another hour. That was tolerable and for whatever reason Air Canada would have I felt that I didn't need to make a big deal out of it. The worst part of my Air Canada experience was that upon Arrival in Las Vegas, I found out that my bag never made it to Las Vegas. I immediately went to the baggage claim office to file a report and they said that I would have to contact Air Canada so that they could trace my bag and send it to me. How the hell do you lose a luggage on a direct flight? Could you imagine how frustrating it was to be in a place where you literally had no clothes or any of your belongings with you for a 7 day trip? I have planned this vacation a long time ago and it was my only vacation for the year 2018. I have prepared a lot for this trip thinking that I would finally be able to relax and get my much needed rest. But I was wrong, Air Canada ruined my vacation because I mostly spent my time making a lot of phone calls, sending emails during the trip and what's worst is that I was only compensated for $200 which doesn't even compare or amount to the stress, hassle and huge inconvenience that they have caused me. They never really followed up anything with me during my whole vacation in Las Vegas. My luggage never arrived in Las Vegas. I had to literally buy everything in Vegas from underwear to toiletries. I had to always made time to just call them to check whether they have found my luggage. I never got the chance to give the presents that I have packed for my friends in Vegas. It was such a terrible and frustrating experience. As a frequent passenger of Air Canada I felt that this made me realize what kind of customer service Air Canada delivers in situations like this. Trust me, in case this happens to any of you, you can be assured that you will be getting the worst customer service. I never enjoyed my only vacation in Vegas in 2018 just because Air Canada failed to do their job and reassuring me that my luggage was safe and secured with them. If I never suggested the idea of calling the Calgary Airport to check whether my luggage is still there then I probably still don't have my luggage until now. There was no initiative on their part and their plan of action in reassuring their passengers that they will be able to track their luggage is very poor. It's sad to say that as I type this horrible experience from Air Canada, the $200 hasn't been paid. God knows when they will actually reply and take action on this. It's not even the money that I'm complaining about but its more on the amount of time that I wasted just to check the status of my luggage every now & then, the huge amount of stress thinking if I will ever find my luggage and my vacation plans were absolutely ruined just because everything that I needed for my trip was not with me all because of Air Canada's fault. How can you compensate all that? It's not like you can redo my vacation in Vegas all over again. The damage is done. I am so disappointed & frustrated with my experience with Air Canada. Never again.	0
I received an email 1 hour before the flight that the flight was canceled due to maintenance issues. They returned all the bags to us and didn't do anything for us. They said it was canceled due to weather issues (although the email said something else). They didn't provide any voucher for a taxi or hotel. My flight got postponed for 24 hours.	0
Calgary to El Salvador via Mexico City. Aeromexico in Calgary, never checked that my passport had 5 months and 28 days to expire, in Mexico City they did not allow me to take the next flight to El Salvador. I have to stay in Mexico City and after 3 days, spending more than US$1,000 the Canadian embassy issued a temporary passport. At this point my nightmare continued, they lost one of my 4 bags that l checked in Calgary. After one month dealing with this company, they only paid me back $1,100 Canadian dollars and my claim was for $4,000 US.	0
London to Cork. The flight service is reasonable for the money, they charge for everything, bags ,meals and all seats with charges depends on the class. But the booking through the airline website is a disaster, I booked my flight online where for 1st time after completing the booking process including the payment the the window took long time look like loading or processing and surprisingly the window back to where all the flight details again and I have to start all over again. I waited 10-15 mins when I did not receive any confirmation email as well as I have created account where it did not show any booked trip, so I went back and booked my flight which is urgent and I needed to confirm the booking for my company. When I received the bank statement I found out they charge me twice where there is only receipt of one flight and one person. Calling the customer service did not help as nothing in their system Proof this duplicate payment so I have to fill the online form for refund where the only proof is the bank statement that is made me look like i took advantage of the company money and the investigation in the airline in the email said they may take up 60 days! What kind of poor service is this	0
Knock to Gatwick. I am just onboard my very late return to London. I dread the flights as it does not leave on time. This is a budget airline charging a premium. This set of flights cost over £400. Ryanair cost half but for me fly into the wrong airport. I was kind of hoping the cost would mean quality but no. Far from it.	0
Dublin to Orlando. Everything was fine with the flight except the lady in front of my husband decided to put her seat back and refused to move it, even when he was served his snack. Staff would not help. Did not ask her to sit upright until the very last minute before we landed, even though everyone else had been asked to do this half an hour before in preparation for landing. You get what you pay for and next time we will pay for Virgin. It is worth it!	0
Beijing to San Francisco. Worst customer service ever. We were told that there were business class seats available for upgrade purchase but they kept on telling us that we had to wait for people to come to our gate. When someone finally came to the gate. She was very unpleasant and didn’t even acknowledge us and just gave us this dirty look as if we were bothering her. Never again will we fly with this airline again. Everyone does not know how to help people that do not speak their language and they have a whole lot of attitudes. They shouldn’t work in a customer service based job if they don’t know how to deal with customers. If I was able to rate it a 0 out of 10 I would have	0
Manchester to Toronto via Moncton. Terrible experience from start to finish. Budget airline now nothing like the airline we travelled with years ago so dont be fooled into thinking it is an upgrade airline, I would compare it to as poor Ryanair. 3 out of 4 flights were delayed, no meals given, no apologies, no compensation whatsoever. Baggage did not arrive on our onward flight. What more can I say only I will never fly with Air Canada rouge again. They offered us discounted flights for this year, but who would want to go through that experience again, we are pensioners for goodness sake.	0
Toronto to Miami. You pay with points or cash for business class but it’s no better than economy on most other airlines. Air Canada should be ashamed. Unless I cannot use another airline I’ll avoid Rouge, even if I have to pay more. No room in overhead bins. Can barely fit anything under seat either!	0
Horrible customer service who was not empathetic with my flight being cancelled and Air Canada not being able to accommodate me on a different direct flight that day. Did absolutely nothing to make up for the schedule change. Horrible. Will never fly with Air Canada again.	0
Worst flight experience. Travelled with two small children and two car seats. When flight was booked it stated one carryon and one personal item per passenger. We took 2 carry on bags and strapped the car seats to each for more convenient transport since we had two small children in tow. When we went to get boarding passes, they told us we had to check our carryons. I told them it was our mode of transport for the car seats and they said it was policy on small full flights that all carryons be checked unless flying business class. I said can we just check at the gate if there is truly no space. Again told no. I said it would have been nice to have been told this information sooner than the day of the flight o we could have arranged for a different mode of transport for the car seats or packages them properly to check them. The first gate wasn’t too far but to get to the connecting flight it was far. We had to carry these bulky awkward car seats with no good surfaces to hold the entire trip. When we boarded the first flight and the flight attendants were closing the overhead storage compartments, they closed several empty compartments, yet we had to check our bags. Upon arrival to our destination we found that they had now lost our carry on luggage that they forced us to check in the first place. Reported that it was not there and they told us it was in our layover city and they would get it in next possible flight and deliver that evening or next day. Second day of no luggage and we are going to have to buy more diapers and toothbrushes and hairbrush and at least a change of clothes for our children. They cannot even tell us where the luggage is when we call. They are marked and scanned throughout the process so how is that not registering in the system when they enter in the id number for the tagged bags. This is not the first time we have lost luggage on a flight, but it is the first time we have not been able to get information regarding the process of retrieval. There is no good contact number to just call and file a complaint. It was an email process. This airline is in no way accommodating to family travel aside from somewhat early boarding. They give conflicting information when you do talk to a company representative, and offer no real answer as to how they are working to resolve your issue. They offer zero compensation for the major inconvenience.	0
I have had a very bad experience with Air Canada. I was flying round trip from London to Toronto late last year and they completely destroyed my luggage. After a rude encounter with the Air Canada lady at Toronto airport I had to go through months of unanswered emails and calls to try and sort out the situation. Eventually they agreed to refund me for my damaged baggage 3 months later. However, they would only send me a compensation in a Canadian bank account, which of course I don't have as I am a tourist. I explained this over multiple emails and calls, but nothing happened. I was told repeatedly to just be patient and they would contact me when they could find the time! That never happened. The voucher for the compensation expired and they never answered my demands for an alternative payment type. It has now been over 6 months and I have lost all faith. I believe they never intended to compensate me or indeed any other foreigner. I am convinced that if I was a Canadian they would have compensated me ages ago.	0
Seattle to Medellin via LAX / Mexico City. Aeromexico made major changes to my itinerary, instead of waiting 2 hours in each airport (how I booked the flight) I would have to wait 16 hours on my first flight and 11 hours on the second one. For this reason I could not take this flight. The airline offered me a refund of 100% of the cost of my ticket. Now that the flight was cancelled they are putting all the responsibility to the agency that I booked with saying that I have to talk with the agency. While the agency tells me that they have accepted giving me a refund but they need the refund from the airline. The agency is still waiting for the money back to give me my refund. And at the same time Aeromexico throws the ball to the agency. I have been on this issue for more than two weeks. Every time I call the answers I get are very blurry and they don't give me a straight forward answer. I have requested to talk with supervisors but they say that the supervisors are not there. Or simply they leave me waiting for one hour of waiting on the phone and finally they hang up (this has happened several times).	0
Quito to Mexico City. In Quito, I locked my suitcase with a TSA-approved lock. When I claimed it in Mexico City, the two metal fasteners to which the lock had been attached had both been cut and the lock was gone. Apparently the perpetrators were not interested in what was inside (mostly dirty laundry!), but the suitcase was permanently damaged and can no longer be locked. I complained to AeroMexico online, which promised a prompt response. 5 weeks later, I got an e-mail from them giving me a case number and asking for photos of the suitcase, my boarding pass, the luggage receipt, and my passport. I furnished those. They then replied that the damage was considered "minor" and not eligible for compensation "under our internal policies." So, tough luck, customer. Buyer, beware. I will not fly Aeromexico again.	0
Cancun to Mexico City. I am a frequent flyer and I have never experienced anything worse from any airline. 5 hour delay for a 25 minute flight and then refusing to let a family with a baby to board the plane because their attitude was bad. They are rude and disrespectful to customers. We had  paid for an upgrade and it was removed at the airport. We were told to speak to the customer service hotline to try get a refund for the upgrade. Good luck with that!	0
Terrible customer service.  I needed to make some last minute changes to my itinerary. I was given a quotation for the changes which Aer Lingus later advised was given in error but they refused to honour. I had to pay nearly 3 times the original quotation. They also made errors on the amount they charged my credit in Euros and have so far refused to resolve the issue. The flights themselves were uneventful but disappointing. The planes were old but had maybe been refitted with new seats in recent years. The inflight entertainment is basic and I found it hardly worth watching. My USB charger point did not work and only one earphone worked. I ordered 2 kids meals and 2 gluten free meals 48 hrs in advance and did not receive any of them. The final insult was having to pay for alcoholic beverages on the flights.	0
Hartford to Dublin, I booked this August 2018 flight for my honeymoon back in December. When I went to go through my itinerary for my entire trip one last time my flight was cancelled! I received no notice of this I had already been charged and my fiancé and I spent over 10  hours on hold starting Friday afternoon and did not get in touch with someone until Sunday morning who said no one could help us over the phone it had to be done through email! At this point we were in a straight panic and had to rebook so now we have paid twice for our honeymoon and frankly are too frustrated to even be excited about it. Still have not received any response from numerous emails sent and numerous claims submitted through their website. Not to mention I booked directly with Aer Lingus thinking that would put in the most secure position for my honeymoon travel plans!!!	0
Booked 12 tickets for my family to go to my daughter's wedding. After a flight cancellation on the last 10 travelers and later flight delay on United, our Aer Lingus flight was missed. (Aer Lingus booked the first 7 tickets but said they were out of seats on the United flight, so they had me book the last 5 directly.) 4 Tickets were rebooked on United but since Aer Lingus refused to release the tickets for the last 5 travelers, they were left in Newark. Had to purchase new tickets on Norwegian the next day. Aer Lingus left a family with a special needs child at the airport and refused to help. Customer service was non existent, wouldn't provide a person to talk to and said the only recourse was to file a complaint on line. The answer to the complaint was United Airlines ruined the plans, but Aer Lingus is not responsible.	0
I have flown with Air China for the third time and this will be my last. Service is terrible. Flight attendants were rude at times. Food is also terrible. Since it's first come first served, there is no guarantee you can choose what meat you prefer since it will run out. The rice is always bad, so sticky and the noodles are not better. People (and flight attendants) will speak Chinese to you if you are Asian and mostly will continue to do so even when you tell them you are not Chinese. Transiting in Beijing is also a terrible experience. If you don't know where to go, even if you ask they are not very happy and look very annoyed that you asked. Or worse, just shouted at you in Chinese and pointed to somewhere. The time of transit is very short, which you will easily miss your next flight (more troubles). The last thing I am most frustrated about is, at the end of the flight, you will likely lose your luggages. Happened a few times already. And when it does, you have to wait at least 3 days for it to delivered (very late at night). So, never again.	0
Vancouver to Hong Kong via Beijing. I have never been compelled to write a review for anything. Ever. That was until I experienced the absolute most horrendous customer service from Air China.  I was travelling with a group of 7. I had booked a round trip from Edmonton to Hong Kong. This booking was done via Flight Hub which would include an Air Canada flight from Edmonton to Vancouver and an Air China flight to HK. Upon arrival at the airport in Edmonton Air Canada alerted me that my middle name was missing from the flight info and were happy to add it. Air Canada updated both my boarding passes. When I got to Vancouver I went to the Air China check in counter to receive my boarding pass and I waited 2 hours until they told me I wouldn't be allowed on the flight because of my missing middle name. This information came was communicated to me 10 minutes before gate closing. This gave me absolutely no time to contact Air Canada or Flight Hub for help. Air China were unwilling to add my middle name despite showing my passport and other government issued IDs. I had to cancel and rebook my entire round trip because they wouldn't add my middle name on the return flight either. One of my friends stayed behind and took the flight with me. On the return flight my friend was rejected from the flight for "breaking the sequence". Upon enquiry Air China confirmed that his seat was still reserved for him but he would have to pay an $1200 USD to get it back. Air China was incredibly unhelpful and threatened to call security when was asked why he was rejected from the flight even though they themselves confirmed the seat was reserved for him.	0
Seoul Gimpo to Beijing. I have to admit that this is the first time that i have been driven to write a review of an airline. I have elite status on Star Alliance and One World. In all my travels i have never come across a worse airline than Air China. I am writing today warn off my fellow travelers from this airline which probably should be de-certified in a number of territories. I recently booked a ticket from Seoul to Beijing on the US website. Unfortunately there is a glitch in a the system and my name repeated itself (for example it appears as John John Smith Smith). I also can confirm this was not me accidentally entering my name twice because - before noticing the error - I booked a second itinerary and the same thing happened. And now for the incredible waste of time. The US 800 number basically does not answer. When calling the 24 hour number in China given their poor English they seemed convinced that I was somehow trying to do a name change. The UK number answers on a loop - throughout the UK work day - that the call center opens at 9am. Then disconnects. The French number on the Air China website is not valid. The loss of time in the last 48 hours has been absolutely breathtaking and I would have paid the double with another airline had I known. Resolution? 40 minutes to get a US rep who asked that I send my passport in despite confirming that there is a glitch in their booking system which allows for passenger names to be repeated. Still waiting for confirmation that the issue is resolved. Avoid Air China. Buyer Beware.	0
I flew from Montreal to Phoenix via Toronto. Toronto to Phoenix there was no room for cabin luggage that were sent to luggage bay. And my checked luggage did not make it to Phoenix. The Air Canada employees in Phoenix were very reassuring. It was Monday 11:30pm and they told me that the luggage was still in Toronto and will be delivered at home tomorrow morning. On Tuesday morning, no bag was delivered and I phone to customer service : they told me the luggage was not located. On Wednesday, 48h after the lost of my luggage, I phone back to customer service and the status of luggage was still "lost". I took the name and number of the employee and asked to speak to his supervisor. The supervisor called me back 5 minutes later to tell me that the baggage was found in the meantime.  I spent 500USD that day to replace some sporting goods in the luggage, but the supervisor gave me only 200USD of compensation given that the bag will be delivered on flight AC1837 the next day. The delivery at home could take 24h, so I said I will come to the airport. At 12pm, the status of my luggage on "world tracker" website was still indicating that the bag was on flight 1837 that left Toronto at 8am. I came to the airport and surprisingly the bag was not there. An employee  told me that the status of the bag changed 15 minutes after landing of flight 1837 : the status is now that the bag will arrive at midnight, via flight 1835. Never trust world tracker website : even if the bag is not on the plane, the status indicates the opposite even after landing of the plane 4 hours late ! The incompetence of the employees makes this website useless. I asked explanation to the employee and he showed me on his computer that my bag was a rush bag. Why Air Canada did not tag my delayed bag as urgent (72h delay at this time) as they are supposed to do with delayed bag? I finally got my luggage on Friday at 1am after coming 12h later at the airport. On the way back there was no room for my cabin luggage, and it was sent to luggage bay. But they put the wrong name on the luggage tag and I had to quickly ask to put the right tag on my luggage unless it would be lost somewhere.	0
Toronto to Porto with Air Canada rouge. Older plane, delayed by 2 hours due to technical problem. Not much leg space, even for those seats for extra $100. For in-flight entertainment you need to download an app prior to boarding, it didn’t work for us. One AC outlet for 2 seats. I found flight attendants rude, no tea/coffee. One piece of luggage delayed for 24 hours.	0
Flew Punta Cana to Toronto. Complete trash airline. Mechanical delays are frequent and they do nothing to compensate except give a useless discount on your next flight which none of us will ever use because we will never book with Air Canada rouge again. Flight to vacation delayed 6 hours flight coming home delayed 6 hours now stuck at the resort with no room or accommodations and they do nothing.	0
The worst airline on the planet. They will cancel your flights, make you sleep in the airport and not refund your money after you find a competent airline to get you home. I made it home with the other airline before the Air Canada flight ever left. They will make you wait in very long line ups and then spend hours on the phone to get zero results. They do not care about their customers.	0
Horrible Customer service. Our first flight was delayed 6-7 hours due to “technical issues” which was going to make us miss our connecting flight, and the only other flight they could get us on was 7 hours after we land in our connecting city,  a total of 13 hours in delays and the only compensation they gave us was one, $300 MXN or ($20 CAD) voucher for food at only one restaurant for the 13 hour delay. It was almost insulting to receive that voucher. I am disgusted in the customer service and policies they claim the must  follow.	0
Washington to Mexico City was uneventful other than the fact that the plane was incredibly old, reeked of fuel, and there was zero padding left on any of the seats. MEX back IAD and beyond was where AeroMexico showed its true colors. While attempting to board the plane we were informed that there was customs form that was mandatory to board. Absolutely our fault for not having these (we arrived 10 days prior and had discarded these not knowing how important they were). We were told that we needed to go back to the immigration office and get new ones and that it would take 5 minutes and they would wait. So we ran and while sprinting back up to the gate they looked up saw us approaching and proceeded finish closing the boarding door. We begged, pleaded, etc obviously to no avail. After that we were basically treated like dog sh*t to be scraped off a shoe and be rid of as quickly as possible. We were told by the gate agents (just rude angry people) ticketing agents (dead-eyed and uncaring) and supervisor (slightly more sympathetic but also completely unwilling to actually do anything for us) that immigration documentation is our responsibility, and as such we would need to pay $250USD per plus about $400 in fare difference (that's $650 each or $1,300 in total y'all) to simply get rebooked on the same flight the next day (it had seats available). Trying to get us on another earlier flight with a partner airline was completely out of the question. Uninterested in this extortion we ended up paying for a hotel for the night and used points to book a return flight on a real airline. But hold on folks it gets better! Our bags! They were checked on the original flight. Upon returning to the US I called their 800 number and got someone who told me that I needed to call the lost and found line (a Mexican number). This not sounding quite right to me (I had the bag tags and wanted them to just do a search and locate them) I asked if there was a supervisor I could speak to. I was put on hold and after waiting for over an hour, ultimately hung up. The number he gave me to call is unsurprisingly not in service. At as loss for what to do I drove to the airport and went to the ticket counter (they fly one flight a day out IAD and don't have a baggage office). Here I found some nice people that actually tried to help. They did a search and told me the bags were still in Mexico City. "Oh Wait, they didn't tell you?" she says. When you don't board a flight that you checked bags on they're required to remove your bags from the flight before they depart! You should have been told to pick them up in Mexico City and recheck them on your next flight! They filed a request to have the bags brought up on the next flight and promised to call with an update on when that would be the next day. That was two days ago. They gave me a number to call and check on the bags. It goes directly to a VM box. I left a message. Not confident I'll get a response. There are thousands of dollars worth of climbing gear and technical clothing in those bags. I guess it's possible that I will see this all again but I'm losing hope. For anyone who might have had baggage issues with this airline here's the baggage number: 571-502-8784. Bottom Line, stay away. It's not worth the $100 you might save to fly on this airline. Incompetence and a customer service apparatus that is very clearly designed to keep you at arms length and make it impossible get help.	0
Birmingham to Athens return. Main reason I used Aegean on this route is the direct flight during Summer time as Aegean doesn't fly the route during Winter and I usually fly Lufthansa, Swiss, Austrian or Turkish Airlines throughout the year. Really disappointed to realise that the airline I was once proud of has fallen behind the competition. The aircraft was late on departure both ways of my trip. The seats are too close to each other and too narrow (30 ins pitch as LH). The food was unacceptable for a Greek airline that represents the country with the best cuisine in the world, both ways of my journey exactly the same food and each time worse that the previous one.  Cabin crew professional but with attitude and poor training, Night flight and they left the lights on throughout the whole flight without dimming them, announcements were too loud and hasty (especially in English), asked for water twice and they forgot it both times. The  magazine torn from previous use. Lufthansa uses small plastic holders where they offer the magazine so it doesn't get spoiled by use. Finally inflight entertainment is absent.	0
Los Angeles to Dublin. Made a reservation and bought an exit row seat for $70. A few days before my outbound flight I checked my flight details and found that they had changed my seat to a regular seat. I called and got it changed back. On the day I left they changed it to a regular seat again and I had to fight to get my exit row $70 seat back. Crooked behavior! Then at check in they refused to check my back through from Dublin to Leeds on an Aer Lingus flight because, I bought the ticket from Expedia? They told me if I wanted the convenience of checking bags through I had to buy the ticket directly from them. They do not participate in the TSA or Global Entry programs so I waited 1 hour 23 minutes in security at LAX which is always absolute chaos in terminal 2. In flight crew were at best indifferent and mostly just rude. One very small meal two hours after takeoff then not even a snack for 10 hours. Wine outrageously expensive and water was not offered once for 10 hours. When I went back to the galley to ask for water the curtain was drawn so no passengers welcome! Arrival was chaotic (jetway was wrongly placed). I would never fly this airline again. They said that the $70 seat got me priority boarding and at the gate they told me, no you wait till your row is called! Today I was supposed to fly from Leeds to Dublin and then from Dublin back to LA the Dublin flight so far is delayed over 5 hours. I have been waiting 2 hours to even talk to someone about getting rebooked but no one available and again, they refused to check my bag through to LA because I booked the Leeds to Dublin flight through Expedia even though both my flights are on Aer Lingus. Absolute chaos with delay, no one has a clue what to do. Avoid this mickey mouse airline at all costs. Not only are they horribly inefficient but their personnel are either very rude or worse, indifferent.	0
This was the worst trip ever. The crew on the ground doesn’t have a clue of what they’re doing. It took them 3 hrs before they announced that our flight was cancelled due to mechanical issues. Then there was a staff who informed us that we will be refunded the amount of our new flight if we rebook the flight ourselves as their person are taking a long time doing the rebooking. After we rebook a flight with another airline, we were then informed that a full refund is not a guaranteed and was given a Delayed Flight Form that we are to give to their Air China colleagues when we arrive in Vancouver. I was already mad as we had to take care of everything ourselves and have been misinformed. This misinformation costs me $925 CAD. A very expensive misinformation. When I got to Vancouver, the 2 employees on their Air China booth said they can’t assist me with my issues and to call or email Air China! So I called. I called more than 10 times now and the call keeps getting cut off. I also sent an email and there was no help there either. Thanks was told to cancel the booking and request a refund (no detailed information given) But it won’t be the $925 I paid to get to Vancouver. I was also told to call the Philippine office. When I asked if they’re going to cover my overseas call charges, I never heard anything back. I will never recommend them to anyone. Worst customer service! If there’s a zero rating here, that’s what I’ll score them.	0
Los Angeles to Osaka via Beijing. The seats are narrow and a packed Air China plane is not comfortable, especially for a long haul. I had to transfer in Beijing. For some reason I've not been able to figure out, the itinerary I'd been sold didn't leave enough time to get from the arrival gate to the departure gate of the connecting flight. I don't know if that was Air China's fault or the agent (Flighthub)'s fault. The Air China personnel at the airport strenuously maintained that it wasn't their fault. They claimed their only responsibility was to take off on time, and if I missed the connecting flight, that was my fault. Out of the goodness of their hearts, they said, they would allow me to board another flight the next morning. So I had to wait around in Beijing airport for a flight the next morning. As a result, I incurred some expense from missed connections and reservations in Japan. Although I've not been able to find out to this day whose fault it was that I missed my connection, Air China's unsympathetic attitude towards stranded travelers struck me unfavorably, and I'll probably try to avoid doing business with them again.	0
Toronto to Mexico City. I paid for extra leg room as I am tall (6'5") and on the return trip from Mexico the trip was abominable. I had to either spread my legs out, or cross them in forming an X. In addition, because the airline charges for checked baggage, there was no room for my backpack except under my seat, which limited the available leg room even more. Three days after the experience, I still have back pain and leg cramps. In addition, the app for inflight service demanded to be updated, and the wifi provided by the place did not allow for the update except by paying wifi fees. I will never fly with Air Canada Rouge again.	0
I travelled round trip from Seattle to Punta Cana via Toronto. On the way there, there were several issues. First off, seats were highly uncomfortable. Furthermore, the cushions were poorly secured, and slid around underneath you. The leg room was nonexistent. I literally could not fit my knees in front of me on the plane.  There were no power outlets or Wi-Fi on the plane. The return flight was what really set this experience apart though. Terrible seats, no leg room, no amenities. However, the airline made a mistake scheduling the flight, causing it to be 3 hours delayed. Our layover was 3 hours and 40 minutes, which meant that we would have 20 minutes to get to our gate. We contacted the airline about this, and they assured us that we would easily be able to make our connection (quote “that is plenty of time to get there”), and that they would hold the plane back a few minutes to wait for us if necessary. Upon arriving after an uncomfortable and long flight, we could not make it to the other gate in time, and they refused to hold it back for us. The airline scheduled us flights to Seattle the next day, with a layover. We were supposed to get to Seattle Sunday afternoon, but our new flight plan had us arriving late Monday evening. We then waited over 2 hours in line at a very busy and crowded Air Canada service desk. the service was incredibly slow, but eventually they told us that there were much better flights we could have got that would have gotten us home much earlier, but they sold out in the time we stood in the line. I am writing this review from the run down hotel they offered us, after having a meager dinner with the insufficient food vouchers they gave us. I fly a lot, but my entire experience with Air Canada was consistently and extremely awful.	0
Fort Lauderdale to Montreal on Air Canada. Check in was smooth and handled by a friendly and courteous agent at the Priority counter. Unfortunately things went downhill from there on. Boarding was absolute mayhem with gate agents giving conflicting instructions. To make matters worse, instead of using the zone-based queues at the designated gate, they decided to use the lanes of the neighbouring gate causing a mass migration, not to mention confusion, for some 200 passengers. The gate agents were not only unorganized they were actually surly with the passengers. In the end it became a free-for-all boarding experience. When I got on board, I mentioned the chaos at the gate to one of the agents who was not even remotely interested in hearing about it and pretty much brushed it off. We were almost 40 minutes late leaving FLL which stretched the flight duration from 3 hours to 4 gate to gate. During this time the FA’s came around with water and beverage service only once and acted as if they were doing the passengers a favour. In all my travels around the globe I have never encountered a flight crew so aloof and uninterested in doing their jobs. The hard product was decent and the IFE had a good selection of movies, music and games. The washrooms looked like they had not been tended to in weeks and they surely were not going to receive any attention from the crew operating the flight. After landing, it took almost 40 minutes for the bags to be delivered. I have travelled over 1.3 million miles with Air Canada and this one has to be the poorest experience I have had.	0
The seats that are comically narrow for an average-sized person. I made the mistake of purchasing two round-trip tickets from Orlando to Montréal, hoping for a comfortable flight next to my wife in a two-seat row. Unfortunately, the seats proved to be too small by 2 to 4 inches for most people, and for me, almost six inches. While I am 6 feet 2 inches tall and weigh 280 lbs, I am not excessively large. As soon as the seatbelt sign was turned off, I had to stand for the entire flight until it was back on, as there was no comfort in those seats for either me or my wife. The flight attendants were indifferent to our plight. In particular, one of them kept knocking into my wife whenever she passed by. Although it was probably not intentional, my wife eventually had to change seats to avoid her. Moreover, the crew at the Orlando airport was making overlapping announcements, making it impossible to comprehend their boarding process and group numbers.	0
Terrible airline! My direct flight was cancelled due to bad weather. Air Canada rescheduled my flight for the next day with a layover without checking if that works for me. My and my husband tried to contact Air Canada to cancel rescheduled flights but no one was answering the phone. It was not possible to get hold of anyone. I tried to dispute $427 transaction without success. Don’t use this airline!	0
11th April SU0260 Moscow-Tokyo. 21st April SU261 Tokyo-Moscow. Flew on a Airbus A330 from Tokyo to Amsterdam through Moscow. First time Aeroflot but never again. A list of disappointments: All announcements were in 3 languages: Russian English and Japanese even the sales and priority rewards announcements. During the 9 hour flight we only got a cold drink once(!) even during dinner we didn't get anything to drink other than coffee or tea afterwards. This was a day flight and I didn't sleep so I didn't miss anything I'm sure. 1.5 hour delay which is perfectly acceptable for me but don't let us board and tell us every 5 minutes that the delay will be an extra 5 minutes (and in 3 languages again). The sign "fasten seatbelts" was lit for 3/4 of the flight but I didn't feel any turbulence at all seemed like the stewards didn't want people to stretch their legs. Very outdated multimedia system no subtitles available. Stewards refuse to speak English and explains everything in Russian constantly.	0
San Francisco to Guadalajara. This company has the worst customer service. There are many things that they did wrong. First, our flight got delayed because of the bad weather but we managed to get to the airport for our connecting flight 1 hour prior to departure. However, there was no staff from Aeromexico at the counter so we couldn't get our boarding pasess. No self-check in option either. Called customer service and their solution was to book another flight because they couldn't do anything. What an awful, stressful and enraging experience. Never booking with them again.	0
Flew Rhodes to Athens with Aegean. Cabin crew were rude and unfriendly as I don't speak Greek. Seat was dirty from the previous person on the previous flight. They didn't care, they just wanted to get everyone on board. No apologies. Used to love travelling with Aegean but their service has really gone downhill these last few months.	0
Hong Kong to Vienna via Beijing.. Horrible experience with Air China. Flight was late due to bad weather. Sitting on a plane. Out of nowhere went up. Circling above Hong Kong then trying to avoid the thunder storm we did not know was being ahead. Terrifying turbulence. Then 1,5 hour with total helplessness what was going on. Flight attendants did not know either. Captain speaking: "Need to land in Wuhan due to bad weather" - flight cancelled. Stuck at immigration desk (literally). Officers could not let us thru as we did not have Chinese visa - did not need any when you traveled to Hong Kong. Cannot go thru unless there is a new itinerary booked for us. It was 2am entire airport closed till 6am. No english speaking people in Wuhan Airport. Booking system opened at 6:30am. Took ages to get a new itinerary. Surprisingly the new flight times were not able to fit each other. Long story short - after 20hrs spending in China we finally flew away home. Never ever fly with Air China.	0
Nice to Montreal. We had an overseas flight which was over 8 hours. First, the seats are narrow and short with very little leg room. There was no entertainment system at all. We were only served a hot beverage once the whole flight. We had a little turbulence, but the flight was over 8 hours! I would not book with this airline again.	0
The worst airline to travel with. I have had baggage issues twice with this airline. The last one was in Oct. 2022 and they still haven’t refunded me for my broken bag which was due to their negligence. They don’t even give a single cup of coffee free in their flight. When it comes to refunding, they just take you round and round and they say oh the case is being escalated. For $250 USD I have been waiting for 6 months now. Unacceptable customer service at every level..	0
Flew from DUS-SVO-BKK. I am at a loss of words for the unfriendly staff. We had the feeling that they were annoyed about our presence in the plane. I have never experienced such unfriendly staff in my life. In addition 4 hours late without even explaining the delay. The Inflight-entertainment system itself was not bad. I would say slightly below average but still okay. The problem were the headphones. The headphones were so bad that you could not understand a word. So we could not watch a single movie during our 10 hour flight. At least no movie with sound. Food was standard. Neither good nor bad. I would not complain if the price would have been low. But it was pretty much the same as other airlines like Emirates or Etihad. 1/10 will never fly with Aeroflot again.	0
Washington DC to Mexico City. Horrible customer service - I will never fly with Aeromexico again. 3 hour flight delay from Dulles to Mexico City caused me to miss my connection. Customer service barely understood English and showed little concern. I found them rude and unhelpful. I ask my wife (who is Mexican and speaks fluent Spanish and English) to assist me in changing my return flight which was also on Aeromexico. The customer service person was not only rude to her as well but they provided inaccurate information regarding their own flight routes and hung up instead of trying to understand the request of their customer. Never again. I gave them one star because they are the only flight from Washington D.C. to Mexico City overnight direct.	0
Mexico City to Huatulco. I have nothing against the flight attendants but our experience with the Aeromexico airport crew and phone customer service reps last June have been nothing but horrendous. We had a connecting flight in Mexico City that was canceled because of a storm and I understand that it is out of your control. But what happened after that was the problem. We were by the gate when they canceled the flight, no one would help us rebook nor recover our checked luggages. All they had given us was a local number to call for instructions. Good thing I had friends who were able to speak Spanish and had phones with them but even with that we couldn't get help. The number they gave us was useless and we couldn't go in the carousel area since they would not let us in to just get our bags. After a couple of hours of running around the place and pleading with security so they can let us in to get our unsecured luggages in the middle of the arrival area, we were able to rebook a flight. Then they canceled that flight too and so we had to do everything all over again. It was a nightmare. On our way back, we were downgraded from business class to coach. So they apologized and compensated us with a voucher with an instruction that I can use it to upgrade any future round trip Aeromexico tickets. But the catch is that I should use the voucher within a year. Now, I called customer service and they are not helping me in any way. I have booked my flights and wanted to use the voucher but they are asking me to do a lot of things before I can use the voucher. This is just unacceptable. This second experience isn't helping my frustration with the first experience. I feel like I'm in Mexico City airport again trying to figure out what to do without anyone trying to help. It is just too much work for me to be able to use the voucher as what I have been told. To have an upgrade for any roundtrip tickets of aeromexico. I mean, I am not even asking for free flights. I am only asking to use the voucher that I have been given. I have not heard back from anyone.	0
Tuxtla Gutierrez to SFO via Mexico City. I few with Aeromexico in August in three segments from Tuxtla Gutierrez to SFO, and I wanted to get miles credit for these three flights. But the SkyTeam website and their customer service seemed incompetent to me and I am giving up trying to get the credit for these flights. I sent them a message by website too, but no response. On the other hand, I contacted United MileagePlus for Avianca flight (on the flight there), and I got the credit soon.	0
Athens to Brussels. The quality of the service is getting worse. I regularly pick this operator for my flights from Brussels to Athens and back. During my last trip not only we faced delay, but also the information provided was not accurate. They did not clearly communicate the reason of the delay and kept on stating that the flight will leave at 18.00 although it was 5 minutes later.	0
Seattle to Birmingham via Dublin. This was my first time flying through this airline. The transatlantic flight from Seattle to Dublin was delayed, awfully dirty and the seats wouldn't recline. The staff was impolite. The domestic flight from Dublin to Birmingham was worse it was delayed and the management was a mess. As I was getting through security, the airline updated the monitors that the flight had left, whereas they hadn't even started boarding. The also lost and damaged my luggage and were always unaccessible whenever I reached out. This flight was cheap and the food (on the transatlantic carrier only) was good but the pros are not worth the hassle.  Their organization is a mess and they are unreliable. If you do decide to fly through them, get travel insurance and cover your bases.	0
Philadelphia to Manchester via Dublin. This was one of the worst flights I have flown. We were unable to check-in online the night before and without i=forming us, we were given seats that didn't recline, for the 8 hr trip. The food was appalling. The return flight wasn't much better. After having the same issue with checking in, I called the airline to try and check in the day before so we wouldn't get stuck with bad seats again, and they informed us that even though we had an Aer Lingus Reference Number they couldn't help us because it was booking through Expedia. After getting to the airport and waiting at the gate, boarding time comes and an announcement is made that the flight is delayed because a crew member hadn't showed up yet. No updates were given, and a supervisor was loud with some of the passengers that were just looking for an update. You would think that Aer Lingus would have back up crew members. Unable to even board the plane, a full flight was waiting on the punctuality of a single crew member. After an hour of waiting the single missing cabin crew member shows up and we can finally board. The plane was freezing cold, I asked for a blanket two times from the flight attendant and never received one. Customer service is appalling, seats uncomfortable, plane was outdated and food disgusting.	0
We flew from Philadelphia to Dublin and on to Heathrow, return. The planes that carried us across the Atlantic (ASL Airlines) were vintage 1970s. My seat arm rest fell off. On the return flight, the seat backs were not attached to the metal frames and the seat cushion had not 'cushion' or springs or whatever makes them comfortable for 7 hours. The toilets smelled like urinals in some very dank Dublin pub - disgusting! The food was not edible. This was the worst airline experience we ever had - and that includes flying in countries that are not considered "first world." In addition, it is impossible to talk with someone at Are Lingus-1 hour and 45 minutes on hold with Irish music was enough to count as torture. Never actually talked to anyone. I even called the Dublin telephone number and got the same hold and music.  And they charged for water on the flight from Dublin to Heathrow - Really?	0
For an almost 2 hours flight to Bucharest from Berlin TXL we we're served a 20g pack of potato chips which was described as snack. Every airBerlin flight the "snacks" become smaller and smaller but this is too much. That bag of potato chips will cost anywhere less than 1 Euro and I think this becomes towards a customer humiliating. There are always the same unhappy stewardess-faces always looking like they can't wait to finish their shift and go home. Not to mention that at the airport we were sent in an improved Terminal with only two flights very crowded and absolutely no duty free facilities. I am fed up with this airline and I have given up my topbonus card after one year of bad experiences with them. I hope I will never have to travel again with them. The only plus I can give the flight was in time.	0
Barcelona to Montreal. Worst international flying experience! Seats are old and uncomfortable and jammed very close together. No TV screens or entertainment at all for an 9 hour flight. I later heard they had iPads for rent to watch a movie but we were not informed by the staff. We were unfortunate to get seats in the very last row facing the toilets which added an insult to an injury. Strong smell of urine through the flight, non-reclinable seat back, last in line to be served for anything. By our row no choice of food was left and what was offered contained nothing but load of cheap carbs - potato salad, pasta with nothing in it and bread so hard it felt like days old. The flight we booked was supposed to be with different airline but they flipped the airline on us for unknown reason. Feel cheated and very disappointed. The only good thing to say is about ground service. With extremely tight connection interval our bags made it to the second leg of the flight.	0
Toronto to Berlin. This was the worst overseas flight of my life. Horribly dated and uncomfortable seats, very poor beverage and food service, terrible seat positioning (right next to the back toilet, really?!) and overall a horrible decision.  Air Canada Rouge has been my worst experience so far, and I would not suggest it to anyone.	0
Toronto to Ft Lauderdale. Air Canada used to be great, with delightful service, great in-flight entertainment, legroom, and comfortable seats. When they realized that they have the monopoly and can charge whatever they want, they took the oldest planes from the main fleet, got rid of their IFEs, cut down on crew members, packed more seats onto the plane, and charged the same price as they used to with Air Canada rouge. They can't lose customers because a lot of people have no where else to go! I checked in early for my flight, on the app, but I received row 32, the last row on the plane. IFE weren't supposed to be an issue for me because they replaced it with mobile entertainment. Air Canada gave me an alert saying the service is unavailable on my fully capable product, running the correct version of iOS and the app. Ok, we don't have IFE, let's buy wifi. Right? Nope. 8.95 CAD/hour. I'm very disappointed with the services provided on Air Canada rouge.	0
Terrible customer service, change our flight schedule from early morning to midnight. Instead of finding an option I was asked if I just want a refund. Disregard whether customers has plan on the day of arrival, or has booked a hotel or rent a vehicle, Air Canada can just change the schedule without letting you know	0
So so bad! My flight in to NYC - even though I have confirmed my ticket months ahead of time. I ended up having a standby ticket? On my way back I've had to check my carry on and wait for it at the carousel. Staff were rude! Now I hate that airline and will avoid flying with them ever again.	0
Do not use this company. I just purchased two tickets for my wife and 7 year old daughter, and I paid extra money for seats that can seat right next to each other. But when she checked in and board airplane, the seats are not the same we're supposed to have. They had to sit separately. So I called Customer service and they said they don't care, there is nothing they can do. They did not say sorry and couldn't refund the money that I paid extra.	0
New York JFK to Buenos Aires via Mexico. This was by far the worst experience that I have. The customer service was the worst. I have no idea where they recruit their staff but they are very disrespectful. I checked my bag and I passed the weight limit by half pound. Well she said that I have to pay extra, but i have a carry on bag and i said i will put that half pound in my carry on. Then she said that she has to weight my carry on. At this point I was annoyed, not only because of the situation but they way she was telling me. Long story short I had to paid $260 dollar more to check in my carry on. The worst part is that she was chit chatting with her co-worker and laughing while charging my credit card. After all the procedure she get back to me with that poker face and said "by the way the flight is delay". I really doubt that the airline provided any customer service training to this people but I guess we have to start with an apology and not "by the way". I get to the gate and they starting to ask to check the carry on bag, and the funny part is that they didnt weigh any of those bags. I decided to ignore the situation and just wait for boarding, My nightmare didnt end, my seat was next to the exit so the attendant was explaining to us in spanish the rules and  when she finished she ask if we understood. I am Asian but my maternal language is spanish, I replied to her yes in spanish. She looked at me and repeated the whole thing in English again and I said, I speak Spanish so I know what you meant. She stared at me like 5 seconds and kept repeating the whole process in english so I just ignored her and closed my eyes, she woke me up and asked me again in english if i understood. The whole experience was horrible and disrespectful.	0
Los Angeles to Bogota via Mexico City. It was the worst experience I had with any airline. The customer service is the worst. Due to their bad service and lack of interest to help anyone, I missed 3 flights my total travel time was 33 hours instead of 16 hours originally planned. This occurred during my flight from Los Angeles to Mexico City and Bogota. This airline, never offered any help to accommodate me with a hotel during the delays. I really needed to sleep. And I wasn’t able to sleep at all during this ordeal. Not even food vouchers were given. I arrived ill due to the lack of sleep. This is something the consumer must be aware before choose an airline. The savings are absolutely not worth the painful experience.	0
Lima to San Francisco via Mexico City. I've traveled on many airlines and have never experienced such horrible customer service. The airplanes are old and decrepit .I had to use the restroom on a flight from Mexico City to San Francisco, it was an emergency. It was during the time they were serving drinks. Mind you, this has never been a problem on any other airline. They simply ask me to move into one of the isles- they push their cart and I can easily go by. This time, the rep told me to use first class. I was okay with this but the way he ordered it was obnoxious. I rushed all the way back (they were very close to the end of the plane). As soon as I walked into first class the most pretentious women I have encountered stopped me, and told me to go back and use the restroom reserved for my class!  I told her the other airline attendant had told me it was okay to use this bathroom. She literally backed me up into my area and shouted at the other airline attendant that no one was allowed to use those prestigous golden bathrooms. The original flight attendant finally made the room he could have made from the beginning and I was allowed to use the restroom. I have never been more upset on a flight. They had the cheapest prices and they are the worst.	0
Frankfurt to Athens. I am very disappointed in the service of Aegean Airlines. On my flight to Athens from Frankfurt I had to pay an extra fee of 60 euros to check in my cabin bag exceeding the weight limit by 2kg. I was not the only one getting this treatment. Not that the bag would have been bigger in volume than the one allowed, only it wasn’t the correct form but would have still fit the overhead compartment just fine. Also a couple of people who had bought tax free products at the airport and now had to check in their bags because the extra plastic/paper bag they were carrying also had to be in their cabin bag . The service onboard was standard and the flight arrived on time, all of which I couldn’t enjoy after the experience I had at the gate.	0
Rome to Athens. I pre booked my seat. It was close to an emergency exit. However I did require a seat belt extender. Instead of the matter being dealt with discreetly the air hostess as loud as she could said she cannot allow me to sit there if I require an extender because it means I am not fit. No that's not the case. Regardless she then proceeded to as loudly as she could going to every person in rows behind me asking if they are alone and are willing to swop seats because I am too big to sit by the emergency exit. I have never been treated in such a disgraceful manner by an airline. To top it off I was skipped when food and drink was being offered. I will never travel this airline again.	0
Dublin to Chicago. I was one of the unfortunate customers that was on the EI125 flight May 2nd. We were diverted to Milwaukee due to thunder storms in Chicago and the Captain and crew tried to keep us informed as much as they could. We sat on the runway in Milwaukee for 3 hrs waiting for the storm to pass but at that stage the crew could not fly it to Chicago so the deplaned us and we were told we would be looked after in the Terminal. When we got in there was one gentleman telling us they were printing forms with our options and he was going to collect the rest of the people off the flight. We never saw him again of Aer Lingus staff. We were left in the terminal to sort out our own arrangements.  I have been trying since yesterday to find my bag that was on that flight. I have been flying Aer Lingus for years and this is the worst experience I have had -  over 200 people in a terminal and not one Aer Lingus person to take care of them?	0
New York to Phuket via Beijing. Do Not fly Air China. I had read the bad reviews but chose to ignore them, boy was I wrong! First we missed our connection in Beijing due to Air China not landing or deboarding on time. We circled the airport for over 45 min then they didn't let us out of the flight for another 30+min. Because of this we missed our first day of vacation and we weren't able to stay at our first hotel. After being given the run around via multiple emails and phone calls, they refused to compensate our room. Then on the way back they delayed our layover over 4 hours, with no explanation! I've never experienced such flippant customer service. If I could rate them a zero I would!	0
London to Bangkok via Beijing. Do not ever fly this airline. Not only were my flights delayed, but my luggage was lost for several days, with Air China taking absolutely no responsibility, except for the first day on which they told me that the place was unbalanced so they took my suitcase off.  Unhelpful aircraft staff, even had an argument in the aisle in front of us, shouting!	0
Bangkok to Frankfurt via Chengdu. The worst flight I ever had. Air China is not even able to check through the luggage although the flight was booked from BKK to FRA. I had to immigrate into China - had to get a transit visa. I asked the Air China staff for assistance: Their answer: we have more important things to do. The ground service of Air China is not even existing - if at all they are able to speak a foreign language, like English, which is mostly not the case. The service onboard is better with the exception of the food that is inedible. My advice: never fly Air China! The flight price may be cheap - what you get for it is not worthwhile.	0
Victoria to Toronto. Extremely disappointed with Air Canada Rouge, and feel like we were tricked into using this carrier when booking our trip on Air Canada's website. Major complaints were that the seats are extremely small with no cushioning or padding, I'm a size medium woman, about 170lbs, 5'8" and I barely fit in the seats, my knees were definitely in the back of the poor guy in front of me. Also, on a 4.5hr flight, we were offered water/beverages only one time, and it took over 2hrs to get the drinks going because they were so slow to move their way through the plane. I wish they wouldn't offer the charged snacks/meals because it really makes the service extremely slow. Line-ups for the one washroom were epic, they allowed about 10 people to line-up at once so we were constantly being elbowed and stepped on as we barely fit in the seats and armrests are so tiny. Service from flight crew was okay, but they were more concerned with gossiping in the back then providing water and comfort to their passengers. Flight crew was constantly announcing in French and not English and was loud. Rouge player didn't work. Bought a $40 wifi pass that didn't work.  Dreading our next flight, also with Rouge unfortunately. Wish I could get a refund. Don't book with them!!	0
Bogota to Toronto. There was no Spanish speaking staff on the flight. I had to translate for the passenger seating beside me. The crew spoke a lot over the PA about things that were not important (creating memories, and other irrelevant information) and did not provide information like length of flight, temperature on arrival, etc. The pilot never greeted the passengers with information about the flight. They have an app for their entertainment system and the choices are outdated and extremely limited. There is no radio option to listen to varied music. The flight left in the evening and instead of offering a dinner, they offered a breakfast. I was starving when I went on board and I was offered only a candy bar and chips. Nothing till around 4 hours after and it was a breakfast choice. The ground crew were extremely disorganized on check in and boarding.	0
Montreal to Barcelona. The seats are quite uncomfortable and there is little to no leg room. When my girlfriend and I sat down, we noticed there weren't any screens on the seats. This came to a surprise, however, the staff informed us that there would be wifi on board to watch tv & movies during the flight. After takeoff, we inquired about the wifi and that it was not working. It was only then that they had mentioned we needed to download the app before takeoff, however, we could rent an iPad for $10 - although $10 is minimal in comparison to the cost of the flight, it's kick in the gut if you ask me. After dinner was served at 10:00pm, we would expect that the lights would have turned off. This was not the case. The staff did not dim any lights until 12:00am, and they proceeded to turn them back on at 2:00am to serve refreshments and breakfast. There was no personal overhead airvent, and it was left up to the staff to turn it on and off. I found myself cold, needing a blanket one minute and then so hot I'm sweating the next. I will pay the extra money to avoid Air Canada Rouge in the future.	0
Boarding processes excluded priority handling for Star Alliance Gold pax. Departing flight was delayed, causing an impossible connection for my onward journey. Upon arriving at YUL, deboarding was delayed first to cool the engines, then because the gate was being shared with another flight from the USA which had been given priority. As I was eager to make my connection, an Air Canada attendant suggested that I run ahead. When I did that, I was met with a gate agent who started yelling at me. They insisted that I return to the plane (which I did), they proceeded to take my boarding pass away and threatened to file a formal complaint against me even though I had followed the guidance of the Air Canada attendant. The gate agent continued to berate me in front of other passengers. After finally boarding my connecting flight, they did not manage to deliver my checked in items. The special (VGML) meals I was served were farcical in standard. The airline charges for everything on its domestic routes, and after paying for headphones the entertainment unit did not work properly or have full seasons of shows (only two or three episodes per season).	0
On the day of our flight, Air Canada moved us out of our preferred seating that we had purchased, without our permission. We were informed at the departure gates that the refund would be automatic since the change was made by Air Canada, but we have yet to receive any refund. Instead I had to apply for a refund, which will take up to 45 days. At the gates when I asked to change back to my preferred seats, I was told that I had made the change myself, the system had moved my daughter to a regular seat because she did not have a K-eta. Both reasons were preposterous. First, my daughter and I were travelling together. She is a minor and there is no reason why I would separate her from me so that she would sit in a regular seat among strangers. Second, when I said that I did not make any changes to the seating and that I had paid for the preferred seats, the staff at the counter then said that it was the "system" that did it. The story went as follows. We did not get a K-eta three hours before the flight, and therefore the change was made automatically. I also did not have a K-eta, but I was not moved automatically. By moving my daughter to a regular seat did not make her more able to travel to Korea without a K-eta. Regular or preferred seating, one needed the K-eta. I also learned that in the meantime they had sold the preferred seat to another woman. I asked that my daughter's seat be reinstated because we were the original buyers of the seat. I was told that since I could get a refund for my daughter's seat but not the other lady (she had used up her refunds), they would not reinstate my seat. As a result of Air Canada’s actions, both my daughter and I were inconvenienced with the regular seats while the other lady enjoyed the preferred seat at our expense. In other words, Air Canada has placed the other woman’s interest over ours. Is this their corporate policy? They then took 20 minutes to sort out the seating. I was suggested the last row of the plane, just in front of 4 toilets and the food preparation area. There was no other choice given to us unless we were prepared to be separated. I did not want to create a scene at the departure gate as we were already in the last hour before the flight. I reluctantly accept it because not to do so would cause further inconvenience with our travel plans. The seats turned out to be terrible and experience of the flight was excruciating for both of us. During the 12 hours flight, there was constant vacuum flushing of toilets, strong food smells emanating from the preparation area, a male crew member who talked non-stop in a loud voice, and a hysterical crying baby whose parents decided that the back of plane was a better area for her to calm down. Both of us did not get any sleep during the 12-hour flight. All in all, it was a flight from hell. The reason why we chose to pay for the preferred seats was to avoid the problems of being assigned to bad seats. However, Air Canada did not honor its contract with us. We had entered into a contract to fly on the preferred seats and Air Canada had unilaterally cancelled our contract.	0
Bangkok to Moscow 9 January 2015 flight 273. Awful customer service experience. The Aeroflot customer service team promised that they had found extra leg space seats as requested for my wife (dislocated her knee). When on board we found that they were not only normal economy seats but in fact were exactly the same ones that we had reserved previously (before her leg break). So not only was service unacceptable but also the staff seem to have > deliberately deceived us at the customer service and check in desks. I assume to move us on without having to do anything else. So they let the company down and of course passed the problem on to the flight attendants who also did nothing much to help. Very poor indeed.	0
Cancun to Los Angeles via Mexico City. This was the airline from hell. My flight from LAX to Cancun was canceled less than 24 hours before taking off because they were "no longer operating" and I couldn't get on another flight for another 6 hours from the original after being denied many times, a supervisor agreed to book another airline. When I landed in Mexico City for my connection the supervisor said it wasn't her problem and I needed to book another flight so I paid an extra $200 to get to Cancun to make the wedding I was going to. On the way back I had booked with The same airline again unfortunately & when I arrive to the airport they tell me my flight is overbooked! How is that possible when I paid for it? They put me on standby and tell me there's nothing they can do but give me food vouchers or airline vouchers. So she tells me instead of my 11am flight I can leave at 1:20 instead but my connecting flight in Mexico City won't leave till 720pm! So I ended up spending entire days in airports because of their stupid excuses and they gave me a "MasterCard" I can't even activate LOL because I have to call an international number & when I called the airline they told me I need to email customer relations - I thought I called customer relations! This is by far the worst airline and customer service I've ever encountered!	0
My husband and I were flying from Mexico City to Shanghai. The plane from Shanghai to Mexico City was extremely uncomfortable in economy class (by the way, do not pay for the emergency seats, they are the worst seats,) so we decided to upgrade to Premium economy to better our seats (around $6,000 pesos more). When we checked in at the airport, we were charged $1,800 Mexican pesos extras for 3 extra kilos as apparently Premium economy means nothing. You won't get any sort of benefits whatsoever, so if you are reading this, just be aware about the luggage requirements and avoid checking in your carry on. You will not find any sort of helpful staff neither at the airport nor via phone to help you understand, clarify, or reinburse any money regarding this issue. We bought the tickets thinking they were a good deal, at the end, we ended up paying way more than if we had bought a more expensive tickets through a different airline. I do not recommend this airline at all. I am a very dissatisfied customer and we will certainly not fly again through Aeromexico.	0
Return sector from Taipei to Frankfurt via Shanghai-Pudong, including an overnight layover in Shanghai. Check-in staff in TPE to my surprise told me that my suitcase cannot be checked through to FRA as PVG is "not an Air China hub, unlike PEK". Since the check-in staff did not work directly for Air China, I did not make a direct complaint, but this must be mentioned when booking a connection itinerary. The assumption when booking this kind of flight with both legs operated by the same airline is that bags will be checked through to your final destination! This meant that I had to clear customs and haul my suitcase into central Shanghai for the less than 24hrs layover. Furthermore, the transfer visa staff at Pudong was very rude. I did not have my full itinerary printed in this electronic day and age (just my confirmation number written down) and immigration staff insisted on seeing a copy of my onward journey (as I also didn't have my boarding pass for the onward flight because TPE staff could only check me in to PVG). No Wifi is accessible in Pudong Airport to travellers without a Chinese SIM card, meaning I was unable to access my booking on my phone/iPad, unbelievable! This meant that the immigration staff had to physically go to Air China to check the passenger list for tomorrow to see if I'm on it, making me wait 30 min at the counter. Service onboard is below average and smiles seem faked. The food and drinks offering is substandard with none of the alcoholic beverage offerings on other carriers. My IFE touchscreen was very hard to navigate (touch function almost broken), meaning that pausing a film when going to the toilet was not possible easily. Film selection very limited, outdated and often in Chinese. Advice: Avoid Air China stopovers like the plague, however tempting it might seem to explore Beijing or Shanghai! And avoid Air China in general if you have other choices. It's definitely worth spending an extra 100 bucks for service and comfort (especially since my layover costs amounted to this much anyway).	0
Beijing to Geneva. As Lufthansa and Swiss codeshare with air china, I was unfortunately booked on the return flight with Air China. Firstly they have rude customer service, the flight attendants make you feel that they are doing you a huge favour if you complain. I initially received an email saying that my flight type, had been changed from business to economy. When contacting Air China, I was informed that I would be flying with Air China, however there would be no flight miles on this sector. This is a joke, given that the ticket from Geneva to Xiamen and return cost CHF4400. I had selected the seat numbers during my booking and the seat numbers were clearly indicated in my flight itinerary. However, on my flight from Beijing, we were issued different seat numbers and I did not make a fuss since it was a late night flight and all i wanted to do was get back home. I did not have anything to eat, and fell asleep shortly after take off, I could not get the seat to recline 14A, but thought this was because I was tired. Later on about 2 hours after take off, I again tried with no success. Then i tried to switch on the TV, and called the flight attendant multiple times, they reset 4 times without any success. I approached the manager and initially he tried to refer me another flight attendant to assist. I refused his referral and insisted that he resolved the problem for me. He then informed me that he would try to reset the tv again, and would try to get the seat to recline. By this time it was about 6am in the morning, as we had departed 2am Beijing time. So no chair that reclined, nor a tv that worked. Feeling very frustrated i called the attendant again and told him that this was unacceptable. During all this time, I kept getting these looks, as if to say what do you expect us to do? Finally, he relented and said he would see if he could find me another seat, this was almost 5 hours later. From the onset, why didn't they just suggest this. All the passengers were asleep and i informed him that i didnt feel it would be right to wake the rest of the passengers. I changed 3 hours prior to landing, as I had a terrible backache, but will never fly with this airline again. Small seats in business class, tine screens if you seated in front seats, and more importantly nothing that works. So in effect i could have flown economy as i basically received the same kind of seat and very little assistance from the staff!? Even, my written complaint to the airline had fallen on a deaf ear. This is my first and last time flying this airline. This is the worst airline I have flown with and will refuse to fly with them again	0
We flew from Vancouver to Panama City, connecting through Toronto. Flying with AC Rouge was everything but a good experience. Their planes are quite antiquated. On the A321, from Vancouver to Toronto, the USB plug was not functioning and the seat wouldn't recline correctly. The seat pitch is ridiculously small. Don't expect a snack or a blanket. The light was on for the 5 hours of the red eye flight. The entertainment system needs serious revamping. Hardware is old and not responsive. Poor content doesn't help the touch lag or the offset discrepancy. On the plus side, the staff on that flight was very friendly. The flight from Toronto to Panama City was worse. There's no screen in this A319 configuration so we were asked to download a 80 MB application which proved to be useless since the wifi was not working. There was USB plug to charge your device anyway so you don't know if your phone wouldn't die in the middle of a movie. No snack was offered. Last, the staff was not so friendly.	0
Boston to Venice via Montreal. Our flight was delayed out of Boston and we ended up missing our connection. After a complete lack of information in Montreal we waited in line for an hour for what we though was rebooking our flights but turned out was just to issue us vouchers for a hotel and informed we had to call to change our flights. Missing our connection meant we lost a hotel in Venice and our train tickets the next day to Rome. There was a flight directly to Rome for less money that AC refused to put us on because we didn't book that flight. The Boston terminal is small, and has poor air conditioning.	0
My flight was delayed by more than 12 hours and they did not uphold the Canadian Air Protection rights I was deserving of. They were suppose to provide us with accommodation since it was an overnight flight and the delay was more than 4 hours, but they told us “we don’t offer that service” and we had to spend the night on the airport floor. I have had flight delays before, but I have never been treated so inhumanely. Please, please, pay a little more and go with a better airline.	0
Cancun to Vancouver via Mexico City. Boarded our flight from Cancun to Mexico city with no issue. Boarding our Vancouver bound flight, and this is where it all went to hell. As usual with Aeromexico, boarding started late. Flight was delayed by about 20 minutes because of it. However, when refuelling the plane, they miscalculated and had to start all over, delaying the flight even longer. After they finished we got the whole safety video and pre take off information, but we hadn't left the gate yet. Look outside, it's pouring, thunder, lighting, hail. It didn't look good. After about 40 minutes of no information, I got sick and tired of it, so I confronted the cabin crew to make some announcements, which they did eventually, in Spanish. Remember, this was a Vancouver bound flight, most people spoke English. After about three hours of little information, little water and no food, they cancelled the flight and deplanned due to bad weather and a fuel related issue. We all thought, well great, at least we will get a hotel. Just getting our exit tickets took about an hour because there were only two gate attendents trying to help over 200 angry passengers. To make matters worse, they said they wouldn't rebook us and we'd have to figure it out ourselves. They gave us a local number to call, only problem, we didn't have local cell phones. Sick and tired of the gate attendents only speaking Spanish, we went to the check in counters to try and rebook, only to find a giant queue of confused passengers. Turns out, the airport cancelled all their flights that night. So we stood in the line and about an hour and a half later, we got our new tickets for a flight in 2 days. To make matters worse we still had to collect our check in bags and find a hotel. 3hrs later, we got our bags and went to Aeromexico to find a hotel, only to learn that they will not be compensating is because the delay was weather related. Mind you, the captain told us the delay and cancellation was due to the fuel misshap. No matter what we said to their "customer service representative" they wouldn't budge. We were forced to spend two days in the airport with our bags and fellow passengers who also got screwed by Aeromexico because by the time we finished this while rebooking thing, all the hotels were sold out by other airlines. Every staff member we witnessed was nothing but rude to us. Also, the vast majority don't speak a word of english. Being an international airline, I would think speaking English would be important. I highly recommend not choosing this airline unless you want to be stranded in Mexico city with no fresh clothes, beds and food for two days.	0
Vancouver to Nicaragua via Mexico City. I've flown many different airlines and never experienced one as bad as Aeroméxico! Constant misinformation, horrible customer service and surprise fees! I Will never fly with Aeroméxico again. I was charged $188 each way to carry my surfboard! The max I have ever paid on any airline previously being $50.	0
Mexico City to New York JFK. I was shocked by the horrible, unprofessional, incompetent way that I was treated by Aeromexico during my recent flight. Their deception, misinformation and incompetence cost me 8,612 extra pesos! I should not have been treated this way. I arrived at the Mexico City airport in the early morning, hours before my flight. I checked in at Aeromexico's check-in desk. The clerk checked my printed ticket and my U.S. passport and confirmed them. I asked if there was anything else, and she said no, that I was good to go. She checked in my suitcase and gave me the receipt for my checked-in bag. Then I went to my gate and waited several hours until boarding. When boarding began, I stood in line and eventually reached the front of the line, expecting to be checked in and board the plane. The Aeromexico employee at the gate asked me for the stub from my Mexican immigration papers, which I signed upon entering the country. The Aeromexico clerk at the baggage check-in had said nothing about this stub when I asked if there was "anything else" I needed. When she indicated that there wasn't, I placed the stub into my suitcase, which she then checked in. The clerk at the gate told me not to worry, that all I'd need to do is go to the Immigration desk and sign another immigration stub. She told me to sign it, then come back to the gate — that I could then board at the gate with no problem. That turned out to be a lie — or at least, radical misinformation. At her direction, I ran to the Immigration desk, signed a second immigration stub, and paid a 500 peso penalty, then sprinted back to the gate, returning just minutes after I had left. Suddenly the clerk at the gate had completely changed her tune. "Sorry," she said, "plane's leaving. You can't board." I reminded her that she told me to go get the second immigration stub, return to the gate, and that I'd have no problem boarding the plane. The clerk brushed off my concern like it was of no importance and returned to chatting with a fellow employee. Upset, I went to the Aeromexico customer service desk. The clerk there told me not to worry, that this was no problem at all. "There's a 9:05 am.flight to JFK," she said. "Just go to the Aeromexico desk at L2 or L3, ask for the manager and have her switch you to that flight. It will be no charge."  But this turned out to be a lie too. I should have known something was up because the clerk refused to tell me her name.  When I sighed, she told me again: Just go to L2 or L3, talk to the manager, and get the free reassignment. "It's just a little bit of paperwork," she said. So I went to L2 and waited in line for 45 minutes to see the manager. When I got to the front desk, the clerk there said that if I wanted to get on the next flight, there would be a penalty - a 8,112 pesos. That's $453.65. "It's Aeromexico procedure," they said. In the end, I spoke with 8 Aeromexico employees, but none helped, including the customer service help line. They told me they had no power to process customer service matters.	0
Orlando to Dublin. They cancelled our return flight home and left us stranded for 5 extra nights. Directed us to their website which didn’t work. Spent over 6 hours on the phone and got “disconnected” over 12 tines. Was directed to go to the airport and they sent us away. The worst customer service imaginable. They are only after their bottom line and could care less about people.	0
The flight from Dublin to Lyon was rescheduled from Friday to Saturday due to bad weather conditions. On Saturday we had to leave at 11.40 in the morning. We waited 9 hours in the airport and in the end our flight was deleted without any reason. At the airport there wasn't the snow anymore and lot of flights left during the day without any problems, including Aer Lingus flights. I'm asking for compensation but I can't for bad weather conditions as this is not true. The assistance was very bad at the airport. Very bad experience.	0
I warn you do not fly with Air China, it's not worth the cheap prices. I normally don't give complaints because I always try to find the silver lining in situations, but I will this time. Though Air China had some of the best deals, it's only a good deal if everything goes smoothly. I ran into lots of trouble on this trip, and it ended up costing me much more than if I had flown with a more reputable company with better customer policies. I ended up paying lots of money for a very frustrating experience, not even able to take my trip after all. First of all, when I checked my E-ticket, it said the airlines was in "Terminal I" Once I got to Terminal 1, I found out, it was the wrong Terminal! The "I" of "Terminal I" stood for "International." Because of that I missed my flight. To rebook the flight, I was charged about $300. Shortly after rebooking, I found an error in my ticket. To correct the error, it cost me another $200. It also took a period of 5 hours to get all of this sorted! I was on an off the phone with them and had to call them back several times for emails they promised to send me but hadn't. I had my layover in Beijing Capital Airport. Thirty minutes after de-boarding, I realized I left my passport in the airplane seat pocket. After notifying staff (telling them my seat number too), they said they couldn't find it. (Which turned out to be false - several days afterwards, I received a call saying my passport had been found in the seat pocket) I thought they were talking to each other trying to figure out my passport situation. So that's why I followed them and once I realized what was happening, it was too late. They forced me through the security check and back onto an airplane flying back to Japan cause, "If no passport, no be in China!" they shouted at me. Once home, I called Air China to voice my complaint. It took about 2 hours. Rather than taking care of the problem themselves, they kept referring me to another number. In the end, I was fortunate enough to talk to a caring and reasonable agent. But they said there is little that can be done. I spent thousands of dollars, just to have 24+ hours of one frustrating experience after another. I understand that part of it was my fault but also, doesn't everyone make mistakes? I feel Air China has no mercy helping customers with their troubles instead, seems they prey on the problems as a way to bring in more income for themselves. I definitely do not recommend Air China!	0
Los Angeles to Xian via Beijing. Worst airline ever, our flight was canceled minutes prior to boarding and there was no communication. I approached a staff member and was told there was a slight delay and should be boarding soon but when I turned around to look at the plane it was gone and still no communications to the passengers. 20 minutes past boarding time the plane disappeared from the gate and still no word was past to the passengers. 1 hour after the boarding time the staff suggested we reschedule our flight, a suggestion and not notification we had to. finally after an hour and a half past boarding time we were told to follow a staff member and once we got about 100 feet from the counter the staff member disappeared leaving us lost on what to do. We returned to the ticket counter and was told to collect our luggage and to come back tomorrow to re-book the flight.	0
vNagoya to Vancouver. First time flying Air Canada Rouge - will never fly them again. Our leg over to Japan, we flew Air Canada, but Rouge on the return. The bulkhead section leg room was very cramped. My husband is 6'3" and that is why we upgraded to preferred economy and paid extra to sit in these seats, we anticipated much more leg room, you couldn't even stretch out your legs at all, we would have been better with a regular seat. The dinner was disgusting. Have attached a photo, but not even sure what that dark rectangle thing was in my food, it looked inedible. The breakfast sandwich was disgusting. The seats were so thin.  There were no TV screens in seats, but you could rent an IPAD for $10, I did not need to rent, I had my own. The movie/tv selections were from years ago and not that many options to choose from. And the wifi connection was poor, took several attempts to get the app to open and load the movies. No charging ports. Flight attendants. I had 2 kids behind me that kept kicking the seat. Finally I called a flight attendant and asked if they were traveling unaccompanied, (because I didn't see and adult) I explained what was happening and she looked behind me and said, "They're going to sleep now" - not they are not, they were just kicking my seat. They did it again later and I just turned around and gave them a look...they didn't do it anymore. Overall this was the worst flight ever, domestic and International. Air Canada Rouge, you have to do better....much better!	0
Kelowna to North Bay. Staff was good and flight service was pleasant. My beef is with the seating and lack of entertainment system. The seats are so close that anyone over 5.5 ft tall is jammed in like a sardine. Finally after 5 flights I was able to get the Rouge player to work on my wife's note book. The movie selection is poor and it's much more cumbersome than the in seat players from before. This was my last Rouge flight.	0
The interior appeared to me as if not updated since the 1970's, there is no built-in entertainment systems, and the food/drink service was horrendous. They have a wifi entertainment system accessed through personal devices however, this never worked and numerous people questioned the crew regarding the system and were told the system doesn't work when there are too many people on board.  On an 8.5 hour flight, dinner was a small chicken dish and breakfast was a piece of bread. Alcohol is not included with meals when I asked for a full can of ginger ale I was told "We don't give the whole cans." When I then finished my ginger ale and requested another one, I was told that I would have to wait until the cart came back around in a couple hours. My return flight was even longer, the entertainment system didn't work, and the service was poor.	0
Upon arrival from Cleveland, I began my layover until the scheduled 10:05 Pm departure. However, by shortly after 6Pm they were already warning of what turned out to be constant further delays until a scheduled 12:25 the next day. They began boarding us shortly after the rescheduled departure delay. We sat in a very full plane on the tarmac until actual departure at 2:47 Am. During the entire series of delays both in the airport and on the plane Air Canada gave us nothing including no reason for the delay. Their response to my complaint is that the reason was unscheduled mechanical problem of undefined nature.	0
We were travelling from Cancun, Mexico to Boston USA, via Toronto , Canada and there was 6 hours lay over in Toronto (YYZ). Our flight was at 9 pm from Toronto to Boston, the incoming flight was showing delayed and supposed to arrive at 9:52 pm from New York but they were showing our flight was on time till 8:40 pm then suddenly announced flight was cancelled due to weather which was outright lies. They just can not blame the weather to avoid taking care of the passengers when flight between our destination was taking off and landing albeit with some delay. On top of that uncivilized staff and threatening passengers	0
We flew from Atlanta through Toronto to Calgary on March 5, 2023. Our first flight was delayed well over an hour and the second one was 1.5 hours (almost all Air Canada flights delayed). There were no weather issues or other explanations offered to anyone. Also, while attempting to check-in online we realized they had not seated us together even though we had booked these flights 2 months prior. The only way to get seated together online or at the airport was by paying a seat upgrade fee, per person, per flight. Air Canada counter person also forced me to check a bag even though my luggage met the criteria for carry on. On both flights we noticed many others around us also separated from each other so among ourselves we moved around til everyone was seated together.  We were also bumped from our second flight since an earlier flight had been cancelled, causing us to take a later flight and arrive home 1.5 hours later (at 1:30 am). I realize extreme patience is needed to travel these days but Air Canada makes travel a nightmare.	0
By far the worst airline experience I've had. 3 of my 5 flights were delayed, causing me to miss several hours of my vacation, and eventually the final leg of my trip. The gate agents were rude, and refused to answer even the most basic question. My new luggage, purchased brand new at my destination and marked fragile, came back broken and looking as if it were a decade old, it's contents destroyed. I found the food was basically inedible.	0
Guadalajara to Monterry. We had the worst experience with Aeromexico with our flight from Gaudalajara to Monterrey on 23rd July. In the airport we were faced with a huge line to check in and it was moving incredibly slow. We only had to check in our baggage as we had already checked in in the system. There was no baggage-drop line. After we had queued for more than an hour and we finally reached the counter, the staffer demonstrated the worst service I've ever experienced. It turned out that our two suitcases each exceeded the permitted weight limit on 23 kg with 200 grams. It is normally not a problem, as I in two seconds relocate some of the content from my check-in suitcase to my hand baggage but they refused to let us do so, unless we went to the very back of the line. This would mean that we would miss our flight. Instead we had to pay MXN 1800 each (ie in total MXN 3200) for the overweight.  It is a significant off-market and burdensome condition not to be allowed to repack the suitcases in order to comply with the allowed weight limit. We will never use this airline again!	0
San Antonio to Puerto Vallarta via Mexico City. The lack of customer service is why I will never fly them again. We had originally booked our trip on March 2, 2017 and picked our dates and flights based on the family budget for our vacation. In May we received notice that the return flight was cancelled and come to find out there were no flights with them back at anytime that day. So we could either fly back with someone else and we could stay another day. After looking over the options the cheapest was to stay another day. I understand that this can happen, but with any other airlines they would try to compensate the customer because of the issues. After trying to contact them, found out that in order to get an answer the only option was through email with a 5 day response time. As a group we were just hoping that they might at least pay for our baggage since it would not cost the airlines extra money and it would help us by paying some of the cost we were having to pay out. By the time they finally answered it was to say no, but that they were sorry and really hoped to get our business back. We have flown with other airlines and they moved our flight by 15 minutes and gave use $25 vouchers that could be used for future flights or our baggage. So even with all of this we went and when checking back in, the website would not allow us to add baggage to 4 of our guest as it showed they already had paid baggage, so we add the 2 extra. However, when we got to the airport, it only showed the 2 bags. So now instead of the $20 we have to pay $25. However, when we went to pay because of the currency exchange we had to pay $30 and they were not willing to honor the $20 we would have paid because of their website issues. This does not even cover that the plane looked as though it was going to fall apart at any moment and since they do not seem to do compensation you would think they could pay for upgrading their planes.	0
Quito to New York via Mexico City. Aeromexico refunded my ticket without letting me know and for no reason. The night before my flight, I received an email from them to check in online, so I did not suspect anything was wrong. Upon arrival at the airport, I was told that my ticket had been refunded and was therefore no longer flying with them that day. I asked why and they couldn't give me an explanation, no one knew why. When I told them that I had received an email from them just the night before, the customer service agent told me, "Well maybe if you would have checked in online we would not have refunded your ticket." He then suggested that I fly tomorrow, which would cost three times the original ticket. After an hour of talking to multiple people, they told me I would be able to fly that day I just had to pay for the ticket. However, their machine would not accept my credit card and I could not take out an efficient amount of money from the ATM to cover the cost, and they refused to take a card over the phone from a family member. So I was unable to get on the plane, and had to re book, which I did so with a different airline.	0
I am so disappointed to have to write this review of Aer Lingus. I fly regularly with them 3-4 times per year, but now I will have to reconsider. I had no success in trying to change the date of a return flight, despite availability on the return flight I wished to avail of. I called the company and they refused to do it over the phone. In addition, I tried through their online system which would not permit it. At this point, the service experienced was highly frustrating. Having wrote to "Guest Services, which is their inappropriately branded customer complaint department, they provided me with a three line vague response that didn't correspond to my complaint in any way. I found this experience bordering on arrogant. Having returned an email to them outlining this, they chose not to reply. I tried to engage the company on social media, no reply either. When I had a great experience with Aer Lingus about two years ago, I wrote to the company outlining how grateful that I was. At that time I had backspin and they upgraded my seat to accommodate me. Within hours, I had received two emails from the company about how delighted they were. On this occasion however, there wasn't a word from the company for five days after my email was sent, and the customer services rep on the phone was short and unwilling in any way to help me. I will not fly with Aer Lingus again!	0
Shanghai to Melbourne. Was due to fly from Shanghai to Sydney on Qantas recently but due to mechanical issues we were placed on an Air China flight instead. It was horrific from start to finish. Rude and unhelpful check-in staff, rude and abrupt staff at gate, flight attendants were not friendly and avoid the food at all costs as it looked very old and re-heated quite a few times. The seats were very uncomfortable and the plane was an old and dirty one. The only small thing I was grateful for was that they had a very limited choice of movies in English which at least passed the time. Even if I was offered a first class free ticket anywhere on Air China I would decline. Do not use this airline at all.	0
This was my first flight with Air Canada rouge and the worst flight experience. We boarded the aircraft facing an over 8 hour transatlantic flight. Shortly after boarding, the flight attendant made an announcement that there is no running water in any of the lavatories. Also, there were no IFE monitors in the seat backs. Passengers had the option to rent an ipad for an additional $10 or download their app and watch on your own device. This had to be done prior to boarding.  Naturally, hundreds of us were trying to download at the same time. Therefore, it took a very long time, just to realize that the movie selection was sparse and terribly outdated.	0
Our flight was scheduled to leave at 8:55pm but we got delayed until 10pm due to bad weather, then it was canceled. The staff was unpleasant and practically shooed all of us across the airport to customs. We finally got a rebooked flight for 7:50am the next morning. We reached the hotel at midnight and got little to no sleep. Bottom line, the service was horrible and their crew need to return to school. This was my first and last time flying with Air Canada. I purchased their Wi-Fi, it took more than half the four hour flight from Vancouver to Toronto for it to start functioning.	0
Excellent flights both ways with Adria Airways from Manchester to Ljubljana. Staff friendly but unobtrusive. Leg room far better than most economy flights, seats comfy and plenty of storage space. Flights on time, quick and efficient boarding and disembarking, smooth take offs and landings. All in all a very pleasant experience.	1
Two short hops ZRH-LJU and LJU-VIE. Very fast on CRJ 90. Seats comfortable and crew was fine. Ground services good and lounge was quite nice.	1
Flights from LJU to ZRH and back all on time. In Economy class was served just coffee tea an water but it's fine for one and a half hour flight. Very friendly and helpful cabin crew members. Very clean and comfortable cabin on CRJ900 aircraft.	1
London Gatwick to Ljubljana and Ljubljana to Vienna in Business Class. Delayed slightly at Gatwick but that happens. Otherwise very good flights. Cabin crew friendly and welcoming ensuring that you were okay - without being too pushy and forward. Short flights and light meals/snacks served.	1
Domestic flight Accra-Tamale. 1hr flight. One time in both directions. Water, juice and snack (fish or meat pie, savoury biscuits) provided on this short flight (more than you get on BA domestic/European flights three days). Friendly and very polite cabin crew. Marvellous captain who gave great information about the flight. Joint venture between Hainan Airlines (China), Hahn Airways and Ghanian investors. An excellent service which makes domestic travel much easier in Ghana	1
Santiago to Buenos Aires. Excellent. No problems at all. Will fly again. Great staff at both airport and plane crew, clean aircraft, comfortable seat for economy class flight departed on schedule and arrived 10 minutes before.	1
My first experience with this regional airline on a short hop from Point-a-Pietre to Melville Hall. Very pleasant and relaxed flight, nice staff and decent leg and hand luggage space. Will be happy to fly with them at any time again.	1
Excellent flight, good service with hearty meal (starter main course dessert tea and coffee) Duty service on board. A generous pitch for economy class seats. Note the delay at departure due to the closure of Orly airport and the flights diverted to Paris CDG.	1
Paris to Algiers. Very good flight, excellent catering, clean plane, but crowded. The cabin is spacious for a 737, room for the legs, comfortable seat. Very good meal for a 2 hour flight. The crew is listening. Only complaint, the windows were dirty.	1
We flew business class (club condor) from JFK on Feb 21 and returned on Feb 28. Great experience. Airbus 330-200 was clean and comfortable. Both flights left on time. Crews were first-rate. Great bargain. Highly recommend it.	1
Flew four times over the course of a month internally around Argentina (EZE-El Calafate El Calafate-Trelew Trelew-EZE EZE-Iguazu) and was very happy with service. Check in was prompt and staff were friendly and bilingual. Never experienced any delays in fact we were actually moved forward from a 6 hour change at EZE to a flight departing 5 hours sooner for no extra charge. Snacks and drinks served in all flights and despite the 737-7 seats being noticeably more cramped and less comfortable than the -800 I'd certainly recommend.	1
Travelled from Madrid to Buenos Aires in May as the starting point of my South-American holidays. Reasonable prices and a remarkably good service all along the flight. There was a wide range of food to choose including delightful Argentinean beef. Check-in was fast and simple and the flight had no delays at all.	1
Even though Aerolineas Argentinas has received too many complaints from customers recently my flight from Sao Paulo Brazil to Buenos Aires Argentina on March 1 2014 in Premium Economy Class was great and I have no complaints. The flight was on schedule the flight crew were polite and helpful. Aerolineas Argentinas' premium economy class is the same as most US companies' domestic first class. The seats are J seats very comfortable and the food in this class was also a great sandwich yoghurt and a chocolate muffin. Compared to service in the same route provided by Brazilian companies I have flown and comparing also the price Aerolineas Argentinas Premium Economy class is far better in service and mainly in seat comfort!	1
I took three flights in November. Buenos Aires (AEP) to Cordoba Cordoba to Mendoza and Mendoza to Buenos Aires (AEP). They were award tickets through Sky Team (Delta) points. I was a little apprehensive after reading the comments here but in my case the flights all left close to on time and the aircraft were nearly new. Seating was comfortable and space was adequate. On each flight there was a beverage service and small snack box.	1
Tucuman-Buenos Aires-Tucuman. Two good flights the first on a Boeing 737-700 departed on time and arrived 15 mins early. Flight service is efficient and cabin crew very friendly. Totally recommended.	1
Buenos Aires-Iguazu Falls return. Two good flights the first on a Boeing 737-700 departed 10 mins early and arrived 15 mins early. Flight service is efficient and cabin crew friendly. The return flight on an MD-88 old but in good condition quiet and comfortable with a friendly and helpful cabin crew with the flight arriving at Aeroparque (AEP) 10 mins early.	1
Salta-Puerto Iguazu domestic flight operated by Austral. Flight a Embraer 190 with personal entertainment with TV series and documentaries and some CD's. The entertainment system failed twice but the crew reactivated it quick. Did not expected entertainment on a domestic flight. The crew offered a sandwich with a drink. Good legroom at emergency exit but the normal seats also offered good legroom for this short flight of 1.5 hrs. Departed 2O mins early and landed 40 mins early in Iguazu.	1
I have travelled several times with Aerolineas. Buenos Aires-Rio De Janeiro and Montevideo. Domestically I have flown between Buenos Aires and Mendoza Cordoba and Salta. I only have praise for the staff and organisation of this airline. I have encountered polite efficiency from check in staff and air crew the aircraft were clean and I experienced no delay or problems with the flights.	1
Best airline in Russia! Very nice staff, comfortable seats (I don't ask much, I mean this is coming from a girl who drives tanks), good service and power supplies, anything you can possibly ask for, enough room for my single bag, and even more room. Great service, good crew, wonderful meals, and so much more!! Ground service, I was pushed around a lot, but that isn't the staffs' fault. I don't remember turning on my in-flight entertainment system, I was too busy playing World of Tanks Blitz with the incredible WiFi.	1
I was very impressed with the staff. Many thanks to the Aeroflot representative Nina at Larnaca, who was extremely professional, friendly and genuinely caring for her passengers. The cabin crew were outstanding as well, especially the flight attendant Asiya and the purser Irina. They did everything to make people onboard happy.	1
London to Moscow on brand new A350-900. I must say I’ve experienced one of the best business class hard products in the world. Amazing suits with doors, featuring a huge and easy to navigate IFE screen with lots of movies and music, super comfortable lie-flat seat, lots of storage space, and great touches, such as a personal wardrobe, and a locker with a mirror. Staff were amazing, food was good (although I think Aeroflot still has a room for improvement here, especially if it wants to become a 5 star airline), and ground service was quick and efficient. All in all, Aeroflot’s A350 is definitely above and beyond any competition from other European carriers.	1
Had a really nice flight with Air Arabia. Great seat pitch, comfy seats and easy process all the way. Cabin was perfectly clean and crew sufficiently attentive. It was my first time on Air Arabia but it will not be the last	1
Aeroflot refunded fully the ticket costs by clicking only only button. The process was easy and fast. My flight was not cancelled it’s just due to the new quarantine rules in the country of arrival I had to cancel the ticket. I was surprised and please to see how easy and fast the refund process is. Other airlines offer vouchers or refund only 30% of the ticket price whereas Aeroflot did it  on their website and refunded the full fare paid. I am very pleased with the service and would be happy to book again.	1
Lyon to Moscow via Delhi. Fantastic customer services. I had a cancelled flight with another operator so missed my long haul, called the free helpline and the service was excellent and every easily resolved. I have flown a few times with Aeroflot and have always been very surprised at how good and easy the customer services are. Thankyou	1
London to Dubai via Moscow. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for the service provided from staff when buying our ticket at Heathrow Terminal 4. The service is second to none. When we got to Dubai was brilliant as per your advice, we are welcomed from the immigration and no trouble at all. We cannot thank you enough and staff at Heathrow are an assets to Aeroflot. Definitely will visit Moscow next time with your company!	1
Seoul to Busan. First time with Air Busan and it was great. Price, App, check in, employees, service,luggage and on time. At the check in I was offered an earlier flight, no fee. There were no problems with this airline and trip. Recommend.	1
CPT-GBE GBE-JNB. First flight a clean Bae146 in very good condition half empty with loads of leg room. Food excellent for an airline and service find. Second flight on an equally clean ATR72 with equally good snacks. All flights on time. Much prefer them to SAX or Airlink!	1
My family flew to Daegu from Gimpo. From check-in to boarding, service rendered by all staff were efficient and excellent. Cabin was clean and seats were usual economy class comfy. On our return flight from Daegu to Gimpo, we were late due to traffic and could not check-in thru self serve kiosk. We had barely 15 mins prior to flight departure. Approached counter staff for assistance. First thing the staff did was radioed the Captain while processing the checking in and printing of boarding passes. An agent came over to escort and assisted us throughout the procedure to ensure we boarded the plane without further delay. All these were completed within 15 mins and flight departed on time. Our biggest compliment is towards the Captain for both flights. Journey was smooth and landing was perfect which you dont even feel the plane has landed. Flew with many major top 10 airlines in the world but never had this landing experience ever before. Cabin Crew rating, great and comparable to top airlines! Keep it up and will definitely choose and fly Air Busan on all my destinations where served by Air Busan.	1
Fantastic Service. Booked from Australia for Jo'burg to Maun flight. Kept great communications for any changes and even transferred me on a SA flight no extra charge for my Kasane-Jo'burg leg when I explained about connection time with my Qantas flight due to schedule changes without having to be asked and emailed me back a new booking. Great service nice snack on a short leg clean modern plane on time friendly ground staff. I hear things might have been different a few years back but certainly my experience was very good and would fly with them again.	1
In August Johannesburg to Maun and Kisane to Johannesburg. Both flights were spot on time. Service on board was fine with drinks and light snacks served for the roughly 2 hour flight in each direction. Aircraft's were in good shape and the seats comfortable for this type of trip. Check-in in Jo'burg was easy and very quick. Check- in in Kisane was a breeze as the airport is tiny. All in a good experience and a great way to enhance your Botswana experience.	1
We were in Jeju flying to Busan then connecting to Gimpo. I noticed our flight was delayed and we may miss the connection. I queried this with ground staff. Within 16 minutes our flights were changed (at no cost), 4 people's luggage located, dragged across the airport, by tiny female ground staff, identified and reloaded then we were seated in row 1 of the airline and off to Gimpo. Totally amazing. I am still astounded that this happened. Plus a refund on our original flight. Congratulations Air Busan. If I could I would fly this airline regularly - customer service appears to be top of their list.	1
What a nice little airline! Air Astana provides economy passengers with a surprisingly generous amenity bag which was a nice touch. Cutlery was real metal (rare in economy!) The food was really good and the staff were friendly. This is how an airline should be run! Well done guys.	1
It was an amazing experience on all the 4 flights with Air Astana (IST-ALA-DEL and DEL-ALA-IST). Seats were very comfortable with enough leg space. Food was fresh, delicious and filling with lots of options (if you book pre-meal). Airline staff was exceptionally helpful and caring, they were just a bell away. Definitely value for the money.	1
I experienced exceptional customer service from the ground staff who checked in our baggage was professional and exceptional customer orientated. Not only she helped with our special request (which she could easily deny as per rules and which required an extra effort from her side) moreover, she went beyond that. She send an email to the Air Astana representative in Georgia asking for assistance, which we never asked for.  She even accepted a slight extra bag weight and wished us a pleasant flight. Airbus 320 Neo - nice aircraft with comfy chairs. Good selection of movies, would be cool to have some podcasts though! Overall flight was good, rest of the staff did well also.	1
Paris to Phuket via Moscow, economy class, Dec 4th 2019. Frequent Flyer with Aeroflot for nearly 3 years now, all I can say is that I'm fully satisfied with them. Swift priority check-in and security check in Paris via dedicated lanes for Frequent Flyers. Lounge access. Fly Attendants very welcoming, helpful and genuine. Space + seat (front row) and economy seat with good width (18') and pitch (32') - Aeroflot is one of the very few Airlines to still give 18 inches width (most nowadays give 17" or less). Moscow Airport is quite good, the various lounges for Frequent Flyers / business passengers are really excellent. Arrived on time and relaxed to Phuket. Had only once in 3 years a delayed luggage (was delivered 48 hours latter to my door in Paris, free of charge to me). Overall an excellent Airline and I strongly recommend Aeroflot.	1
Gimpo-Jeju and Jeju-Gimpo. One of the best budget airlines I have flown with thus far. Air fares were cheap. The seat was really comfortable for such a short distance and legroom room was really spacious (more space than SIA). Beverages were served despite the short flight and FAs were very friendly. Airport staff very polite when we were checking in. Definitely fly with this airline again in the future.	1
I recently flew Gimpo - Jeju and Jeju - Busan and what a great experience! Fares were cheap included baggage and when I changed my flights to spend more time in Jeju I only had to pay the fare difference. The seats were the same pitch as Qantas (31") flights departed close to schedule and drinks were served despite the short flight time. The only slight criticism I have is that their website is a bit tricky parts of it rely on Flash which may be why I couldn't get an English version to load on my mobile device also whenever I tried to put my passport details in I got an error - if this happens try selecting "No passport" this worked for me. I'll definitely choose them again if I'm flying their routes - great effort!	1
PUS-CJU B737 Short flight from us an to Jeju Island. Left and arrived on time. comfortable seating. No food served; just a 50cc bottle of water handed out. No inflight entertainment.	1
Thoroughly enjoyed flight from Nur Sultan (Astana) to Frankfurt with Air Astana Sunday 14th Feb 2021, I was travelling from Almaty to Frankfurt via Astana. First leg economy, second leg business. The service on both flights was very good and the food and drink outstanding. Tasty sandwich on the first domestic leg and given plenty of choice and excellent presentation of starter and main course on the international flight. Good Job Air Astana.	1
I have been using Air Astana on various domestic and international routes for 15 years. I have seen great improvements in this time from the early days. Not only in the quality of the aircraft and facilities but especially in in the cabin services. My recent flight this month highlighted this. Though I travelled economy I found the cabin staff very attentive and helpful. They were polite and supportive and prompt with any requests. The food was excellent, it was breakfast but hot, tasty and filling. The amenities packs are now eco friendly. They contain all those items that one requires on a journey of 3 hours or longer. They look good too. It was a new aircraft that was very clean, with comfy seats and was equipped with an excellent entertainment package. My only concern was travelling during these difficult times and the flight was full, understandably with the reduce number of flights scheduled. The in cabin safety brief, which is excellent and worth watching in all three languages, has had an amendment to relate to the latest pandemic requirements. The cabin crew enforced these rules without fear or favour in a very polite and professional manner. Keep up the good work Air Astana, you are my favourite airline.	1
Almaty - Saint-Petersburg is my favourite route. Flight was on time. Aircraft was brand new A320NEO (2 months old). Service was excellent, food was very good, choice of beverages perfect. Now airline using eco packs for amenity kits and it looks so good! And also inside of the kit they even put neck pillow, because flight was longer than 5 hours.	1
I was flying from Prague to Cairo via Moscow, the staff are professional and nice, good value for money, food was nice , cabin was clean, Aeroflot improved a lot.	1
FUK-PUS return on an aged 737-400 clean and offering reasonable leg space. Check-in courteous despite I arrived pretty late. No inflight service for such a short flight they served orange juice but it was not necessary to do so if fares go lower. They have an interesting selection of duty free shopping on the plane it's worth trying it. Uneventful trips and luggage arrived safe and sound. I'd wish they offered more routes into Korea from Fukuoka. Very user-friendly website that allows to catch good fares and per it's seat selection. Flying BX was a nice surprise.	1
Very good considering the fares. I even wonder when they serve drinks on a 50 minutes flight (Seoul - Pusan). I'd rather have a cheaper ticket.	1
Very good friendly and uncomplicated service. Like the fixed prizing. Makes you wonder why it has to be so stressful travelling in Europe with the likes of Ryanair etc. Would always choose Air Busan again.	1
Flight from Moscow SVO to Paris CDG, approximately 3 hours long. Hassle free boarding. Very attentive cabin crew. Clean cabin. FAs kept working with passengers throughout the flight. The seats are wide and comfortable, uncomparable with pitiful masquerading of business class by other European airlines. Full scale lunch: scallops with cucumber spaghetti and salmon with wild rice were sublime. Grand cru champagne and a variety of wines. Overall impression: very robust high-quality product from Aeroflot, exemplary for other European carriers.	1
GMP-PUS-GMP. Very good fast efficient and friendly staff. At GMP ground handling done by Asiana so all the traditional quirks of this great airlines. Served water and OJ on this very short flight.	1
Kuala Lumpur to Almaty. I credit Air Astana for their superior service on a recent flight from KUL to ALA last Tuesday 1st October. The service received on the flight was second to none, where the team leader provided a first class service during the the 7 hour flight. The quality of the main meal, wine and snack was excellent. I know Air Astana has received some criticism in the past but it was one of the best experiences I have had when flying. They made you feel welcome and special from start to finish.	1
Washington DC to Moscow. Very pleased with this airline. In-flight food / service / entertainment was top notch and exceeded my expectations. The aircraft was also new with generous leg room. Thanks Aeroflot!	1
Seoul to Minsk via Moscow. I had a booking that involved two airlines and three layovers, and when I came to check in in the city of origin, it turned out I needed a visa to make the first layover. A visa I didn't have. Aeroflot (the second airline) agreed to take my luggage from the first airline so that I wouldn't need to go through passport control and pick up my luggage and then check in again to continue my journey. I will never forget their kindness. Moreover, on the second leg of my journey I had a problem with my ticket (bought through the agent, not from the airline) and the manager Andrei in Seoul check in desk went the extra mile to call the agent on my behalf and try and solve the problem, and in the end helped me to buy a new ticket all the way being calm, supportive and professional. The more I fly Aeroflot, the more I feel secure that I will always be taken care of.	1
Kuala Lumpur to Almaty. I would like to express my deep gratitude to the crew of KC936 at the 25th August for their good work in conditions of prolonged turbulence. The stewardesses, in spite of the shaking, carried out the service, organize food and drinks. The food was excellent. Service was on top! Thanks to the pilots and the entire crew for the excellent flight.	1
Just flown Dublin to Alicante. Couldn't find a fault. Very pleasant staff on ground and in the air, but I still think hold luggage costs are are pure theft.	1
Vladivostok to Moscow. Very pleasant surprise, one of the best flights I've recently had. Aircraft was a bit dated but very comfy with a decent legroom. Being 6'3" i didn't find it uncomfortable on 8 hours flight. The food is great, drinks selection could be better but nevertheless was OK. Toothbrush as well as slippers and eye-masks were provided which made the flight much better.	1
Nur Sultan to Shymkent. Extremely nice experience. Food and drinks served on short flight all included in the ticket price. Cabin crew very friendly and professional.	1
Aegean Airlines will remain always my first choice and my favorite airline. The best Airline in Europe without any doubt. Cabin crew are so helpful, patient and supportive. Please keep up the excellent work and I hope that Aegean will make long haul flights soon.	1
Moscow to Athens. Aeroflot seems to be one of the very few remaining airlines to offer a real business class product with special seats in short haul flights. Service is refined (I was even offered a tablet with films downloaded ) and you really feel the difference compared to the usual slightly improved economy class product. All this at very competitive prices . Congratulations Aeroflot.	1
Long family flight with 9 month old baby. Great flight. Thank you very much for your excellent service and attention to infants! We flew with a baby from Madrid to Bangkok with a transfer in Moscow. At all stages the staff were friendly and very caring towards our kids. Docking time in Moscow was only 1 hr 20. In the transit zone we were actively driven up and let everyone forward among a huge crowd. Very carefully as all half asleep thought slowly. I want to note separately that the quality of food even in economy class is at a high level and not some kind of plastic like many airlines have. If coffee then only natural not instant and cheap Nescafe. Tasty tea. I often fly and I have something to compare. All kids are given packages with toys - this is very nice! When we flew from Moscow to Bangkok the stewardess herself offered to transfer to the free lane where there were no seats in front which turned out to be much more comfortable :) At all stages of the flight there were modern and comfortable aircraft. Clean and well maintained at a low cost. Aeroflot - you are just super!	1
St-Petersburg to Istanbul via Almaty.  A21 neo for both ways with Recaro seats,comfortable for 5-6 hours flight. Food was perfect, especially from Istanbul. Good choice of beverages.  On the way to Istanbul I over slept my dinner, but I got it after and the coffee was hot. In Istanbul new airport I had to visit Air Astana kiosk and I got  qualified assistance there! Other flights Saint-Petersburg to Almaty, from Almaty to Astana and back to Saint-Petersburg were very good.	1
I had a fantastic week of holidays in Hurghada and to review a hotel is a must but I also think it is very important to acknowledge the airline which makes it all happen by bringing you over and back in safety. I flew with Air Cairo for the first time there and back after a week and both flights were comfortable and I felt very welcomed. The staff both on the flight on 24 June (Prague to Hurghada) as well as on 1 July (Hurghada to Prague) were friendly, smiley and professional. At one point there was strong turbulence and the staff were supportive. Next time I fly to Egypt I will go for Air Cairo.	1
Sharm El Sheikh to Amman. Perfectly smooth check-in process, our car seats for the kids were handled without fuss. One bag was 23kg but was not a problem. Contrary to some other reviews, our carry on bags were not weighed. We had a 10kg limit in any case. Staff on the flight were very pleasant. Although only an hour-long flight we were given beef shawarma - extremely tasty. Would use them again.	1
Dubai to Almaty. Overall impression is great. Flight attendants very attentive and nice - food is good. Entertainment, since I am traveling often, variety is limited for me. Renewed in two months, not enough. Some some standard business class seats, but I would prefer to Beijing a bed seat, it is night flight.	1
Almaty to Astana on an early morning flight in economy class. I was impressed by this aircraft which still feels very new inside. Inflight entertainment is available at each seat (with a USB port) and there is a good selection of programs. The flight attendants were nice and professional, good info from the pilots and we arrived to Astana with no delay. Overall a very nice experience.	1
Almaty to Astana. Consistency of ground service, food, cabin service and inflight entertainment are core values of this airline. Sometimes I push myself to have connecting flights to the destinations where they have no direct flights.	1
This journey was 6 legs long with Air Astana. Saint-Petersburg to Almaty, from Almaty to Ust'-Kamenogorsk and back, Almaty to Aktobe and back, and finally from Almaty to Saint-Petersburg. If my trip from LED to ALA is usual thing almost two times a year, but my new discovery was domestic flight KC863/864 from Almaty to Aktobe. Oh my god, even choice of hot meal dish. Other stuff just have to mention : clean cabin, perfect meal each way. I also had my air astana's mug I got last year. It's capacity is about 400 ml and asked to fill it up with coffee: "no problem, sure!“ I heard the answer! My flight from Ust'-Kamenogorsk was delayed, but I got notification by e-mail 4 hours before departure, so I was still at home. 6 flights and only one delay. I think it's good factor. overall: everywhere I saw attentive staff, helpful managers and perfect service.	1
Casablanca to Lisbon. I found this airline to be much better than expected. well cleaned aircraft, friendly flight attendants. On schedule too. Very comfortable seats. They sould increase their flights to Portugal.	1
Amsterdam to Atyrau. I am a regular user of Air Astana for work purposes and have been for over a year now. I had never heard of Air Astana before so I was very skeptical to say the least. What a mistake that was. I would put Air Astana right along big international carriers. The on board service and food are excellent the flights are on time. The cabin crew are very professional and language skills are excellent.	1
Best Airline in Europe, professional cabin crew, smiley and helpful. Receiving updates about my flight all the time. The thing that might really need an improvement is the FQT program (Miles + Bonus) , they must be more flexible in transferring and receiving points from other Airlines.	1
I travelled from Sharjah to Colombo on Air Arabia in June. The flight was full but I was comfortable. The flight was about four hours long. I checked in online but my phone failed so got replacement boarding pass at baggage drop. I enjoyed the flight and will fly them again.	1
I flew from Beirut to Sharjah on Air Arabia. Check in was easy as I did it on line. I showed my boarding pass on my phone to get through security. At the gate I changed my e boarding pass to a paper ticket as that was required. Although they loaded a lot of cargo we took off on time. I had three seats to my self and was able to sleep. I was given water and dates which were very nice. I will fly them again.	1
Frankfurt to Bangkok via Astana / Almaty. Air Astana was way more than I expected. Check in was super easy and the cabin service is great. The food, drinks and entertainment make long flights easier. They took amazing care of me when flights changed but I had an important appointment and they moved things around for me to get me back in time. They also put me up in a great hotel where I was also able to go explore Kazahkstan for a day! I will definitely be looking for flights with them again.	1
Great airline! I fly regularly with Aegean Airlines, and it is always my number one choice. Especially the new planes are really nice, and the service on board is good too. The food is really not that bad, especially in business class. However, Economy is great as well. There are some nice touches with Aegean, like how they inform you when your flight is delayed. They email you, and you get a notification in the app. About the app, it works really good. One of the best airline apps I have tried so far! I don't have any complaints. Even after dozens of flights, no problems at all!	1
Stansted to Ajaccio. Excellent all round. On time, drink and a snack served, no hassle to board or have onboard bags. Seats were comfy for a 2 hour flight - fare reasonable. Would recommend.	1
On September 4th 2015, we had reservations to fly Air Corsica from Calvi to Nice. Then we had connection on Alitalia to Rome. Our connections were very tight with only 45 minutes in Nice. Weather on September 4 created much confusion. The Air Corsica flight from Nice to Calvi was delayed 1 hour and arrived at 10:45am. We were going to miss our Nice to Rome connection. We expected to be staying the night in Nice. We departed Calvi 1/2 hr late. Fortunately, the flight from Nice to Rome was also delayed. The Air Corsica agents in Calvi arranged for an agent in Nice to assist in having my wife and I meet Alitalia agent. That agent escorted us through security to our gate and we made the Nice/Rome connection. We arrived in Rome only 1/2 hour late and all of our bags (4) arrived perfectly.	1
Stockholm to Tokyo via Moscow. Great experience with hard working crew and great punctuality. Many people say Aeroflot are a fraud and that it’s a bad airline but these people are totally wrong since they have changed totally from their past and now it probably is the world’s most underrated airline company. The crew was amazingly polite and kind but the one of the only issues was the cabin temperature was too hot on the way home (Tokyo-Moscow) but at least they listened and did what they could to make it better unlike many other companies who would have totally ignored it. The food wasn’t the best either especially when the plane originated from Moscow but from Japan it was way way better. I would definitely recommend Aeroflot and would love to fly again with Aeroflot in the future!!	1
Almaty to Kuala Lumpur. My family and I travel with Air Astana and are accustomed to a high level of service provided by the airline. During a flight last week from Almaty to Kuala Lumpur I witnessed a crew have to respond to an emergency medical situation about an hour into the flight. The professionalism of the Captain and Crew in handling the situation resulted in saving the life of a passenger. Medical emergencies can happen to anyone and at any time. Having experienced the crew's actions first hand I am confident that my family and I are in safe hands with Air Astana.	1
Moscow to Delhi via Almaty. Moscow to Almaty on a new Boeing 767, with personal entertainment screens and mood lighting. Staff accommodating and professional. The meal was delicious with metal cutlery. Wine and beer were complimentary (no spirits on the menu, though), and extras were served with no frowns. IFE was one of the best I experienced, no lag whatsoever. One weird thing was that the screen by design could not be adjusted when the seat in front was reclined, so the viewing angles could be uncomfortable. We were given outstanding amenity kits with neck air pillow, slippers, pen, some hand cream, eye shades and ear plugs. Different coloured kits seemed to have slightly different content, so make sure to collect them all. The crew passed the cabin with drinks several times after the meal service. Seat comfort was okay, nothing outstanding. Almaty to Delhi was on an older A321, with no personal screens. The seats were very comfortable with great seat pitch and traditional "thick" profile of the seats. Cabin crew were lovely and the meal was even better. There were some amenity kits given as well, except a bit smaller ones (which makes sense on a 3 hour daytime flight). You could access their entertainment via your own device and onboard wi-fi for free with no issues, and the selection was impressive, but the lack of power ports meant you will run out of power quite soon. Delhi to Almaty was practically the same as the flight from Almaty to Delhi. For Almaty - Moscow I have made a bet to upgrade on their website (the lowest amount possible), and we were upgraded to business. The flight on a Boeing 767 was wonderful with lie-flat seats, lots of privacy and space, great IFE and pleasant cabin. The cabin crew were very accommodating, greeting us with champagne as a pre-departure drink, and the purser greeted us by name, making sure we had a fantastic flight. Meals were delicious, each course was brought separately. If I could think of any improvement in business class, it would be alcohol menu, because there were just one type of champagne, one type of white and red wine (plus lots of spirits and cocktails). I believe the wine card can and should be improved. Their Bloody Mary was perfect, by the way. Almaty airport is an absolute disaster - it's small, crowded, with nowhere to sit or relax, no decent cafes, everyone is shouting at everyone. Even in business class lounge there is nothing to eat or drink for free, which is just a disgrace. Our luggage made it, and the flights were on time, though. To conclude, I recommend Air Astana, and the economy experience is outstanding, but I will try to fly via Astana next time, since Almaty airport is just so awful.	1
The best airline in Europe, professional cabin crew, comfortable seats and excellent service. It was a pleasure to fly with you. Keep up the good work and wishing you all the success.	1
St Petersburg to Ust-Kamenogorsk via Almaty / Astana. Clean new cabin, perfect meal each way, especially from Astana. I have to mention that food cooked in Kazakhstan always better than from other airports. Wide choice of beverages. Good schedule : short connection in Astana on the way back to LED. KC TV app very useful and its good thing for flights no longer than 5 or 6 hours and cabin not equipped with personal entertainment system. Service unbelievably attentive. Absolutely recommended.	1
Astana to Dubai. It was very nice family trip from start to finish. Everything about the flight was perfect, quick check-in, boarding, quality of special meal, reservation of seats and comfort, kids amenities, entertainment system, cleanness of cabin. I would only recommend to provide wifi access but cabin crew informed me that internet is available on some flights. Since I flew with my daughter of 4 years old I had things to do and hadn’t had a chance to enjoy internet anyway. Crew is very positive and i have been individually welcomed as a Silver member. Overall it was very memorable flight and I would recommend Air Astana!	1
Aegean exceeded my expectations. Didn't expected a snack and few drinks service on a few hours flight. I asked one extra beer when we started our descending and the crew handed out one with a smile. Way more better than other European airlines. I really hope they will earn five star airline status.	1
Smooth check- in procedure at a very busy Athens Airport. Polite and efficient staff on hand to assist. Boarded a clean and shiny A321 Neo, greeted by smiling and courteous crew. Full flight, on time departure, usual high standard of onboard service. Good and clear PA announcements from cockpit in perfect English. Toilets were very clean. Landed early, bags arrived on belt without any issue. Thanks Aegean, great flight and highly recommended.	1
Great daytime flight from Shanghai to Oslo via Moscow SVO. Despite some apprehension from other reviews regarding bags going missing at SVO transfer, everybody and their bags arrived earlier than scheduled at the final destination. Transfer from SVO Term D to E was a quick walk and uneventful. A well supplied lounge at Term E was quiet and relaxed during the short transit time. The cabin crew were friendly and helpful with perfect English language skills and the meals above average, with four main course options on offer and each was tops. Plenty of wine/spirits were available during meals and the flight generally. IFE was well stocked and adequate for a 10 hour flight. The lie-flat beds were not tested on this occasion.	1
Moscow to Bangkok economy class. Moscow Airport is good and the check-in was swift, via Skypriority  lane for Frequent Flyers. Recent Airbus A330. Flight Attendants welcoming and helpful. Was not offered a Space+ seat with extra legroom)although my GoldMember status entitles me to it - but I was offered a Space+ seat on the first segment from Paris to Moscow. Seat comfortable, with good width and legroom. Large choice of movies, watched 3 during the 9 hours flight. Dinner, then breakfast, both good in quality and quantity, and the Flight Attendants again perform very well. No more ice cream between meals, unfortunately. Arrived to Bangkok relaxed and right on time. Was offered a Priority Immigration Swift lane - very appreciated. Overall a very good experience and I strongly recommend Aeroflot.	1
I have had to recently use some other airlines and this has reinforced my appreciation of Air Astana’s cabin services. Air Astana has set and manages to maintain exceptional high standards of service. Al the cabin crew appear to have fundamental English skills. The new uniform is fresh and professional. The safety video has been improved and is actually pleasant to watch even after many flights in a short time frame. The new aircraft have screens on the backs of the seats and passengers can select their entertainment. The new earphones are great and I always keep the set. The passenger pack is in a useful bag and the products inside are good but I miss the mini-biro pen. The food and beverages are of good quality with a proper cutlery. I have found the cabin crew to be attentive and responsive to my needs. Depending on the airport I have boarded check-in staff may not have the same consistency but my recent check in at Atyrau was good (this is not usually a friendly airport though there are some exceptional individuals working there). I would say without fear of reproach that Air Astana is my preferred airline of choice.	1
Frankfurt to Berlin, our first flight was cancelled but they arranged me other flight. Next day I use Air Berlin also this time their service was on time and good service and cabin crew - they are very friendly and helpful. I was very happy their service.	1
Almaty to İstanbul in March 2018. There was no delay on flight. I remember smiling crew faces for that trip. There was delicious food and good entertainment for 6 hours flight. Note: wishing to see bigger planes for such a long vayage.	1
Antalya to Almaty. I write to commend staff on an exceptional level of service when I traveled with Air Astana on the 23 May. The service I had was a superb experience throughout the flight. I trust that you will pass on this recognition to the specific staff members from this flight.	1
Tashkent to Almaty. Excellent food, high tech inflight entertainment via their application and on time. Although flight was only for one hour thirty minute crew was attentive. The only thing I would feel to improve to make announcements shorter since all are in three languages.	1
I am frequent flyer with Air Astana. Almaty – Dubai is the best available option.  The check in procedure at the business class counter works smoothly without any problems. Business lounge at Almaty Airport is not good. Boarding is OK, still some airport problems, not enough jet bridges. The seats are comfortable for a five hour flight if it is not a night flight. The catering is perfect, flight attendants are very attentive, beautiful smiles. The entertainment program is OK, we are provided with iPad in business class with good choice of the video programming. Internet is missing on this type of the aircraft.	1
Unfortunately Air Berlin has gone broke, but they are still flying. I was a bit apprehensive because of the insolvency and the bad performance earlier this year, but despite the situation it was great: very punctual - even half an hour earlier on the inbound flight, nice crew and comfortable planes. Since Münster/Osnabrück is a small airport, one is at the gate within 5 mins of entering the building and boarding is very quick. On both flights we had an Air Berlin plane, a Niki flightnumber and a TUIfly crew. B737 showed its age but was fine. Paid 7 euros for a currywurst. A bit steep but it was excellent. Nice flight over Cologne and Lake Geneva with view of the Alps. I was out of Palma airport within 20 mins after touch down (only hand luggage) which was very good for such a big airport. Big surpise on the inbound flight: I was assigned an emergency seat for free. The normal cost is 25 euros, so this was very comfortable. We even got the famous AB chocolate heart at leaving the plane. It's a pity AB is about to disappear. I have flown quite a lot with them and it was always fine. The only reason I don't recommend them is the insolvency, because they're suspending flights already.	1
Almaty to Astana. The early morning flight allowed me to have the whole Sunday I could spend in Astana. We had a good breakfast in the aircraft. This year I enjoy my Silver Nomad. Despite of the downrating I was happy to know that Nomad Club members start to enjoy better scoring of points. Now we are 3 times quicker to collect the points necessary for the new tier or bonus ticket. Nomad Club develops well and I appreciate it. This weekend I will have my next flight to Almaty to enjoy running at Almaty Marathon that is also supported by Air Astana. As usual I expect good service from Air Astana that keeps me being a loyal client.	1
Almaty to Kiev. Very good experience on this flight. The crew was very attentive and helpful,  and plenty of legroom considering we were on a 6 hour flight on A320. Amenities were great and they offer everything you need to enjoy the flight.	1
My employer was stuck for 2 1/2 hours in the Toronto Pearson Airport because of a delayed Air Canada flight headed to Athens, Greece last evening (June 16th, 2022) due to understaffing of airport personnel and consequently would miss his Athens (Aegean Airlines) connection to Mykonos on the other end. I call Aegean's customer service in Athens and spoke with a lovely gentleman, Avgoustis. Avgoustis was calm, reassuring, patient and found me the best possible solution to get my employer on a connecting flight to his final destination (Mykonos) in the shortest time possible. He kept me calm! I really hope that someone will recognize this gentlemen's exemplary customer service.	1
This was the first trip I tried Air Berlin's (then) new business class service for Europe. I was really pleasantly surprised. This is in my view a much better product than LH or the likes offer. I like that you can get any food or snacks you want from their trolley at no extra charge. This is much better than getting a pre-set tray with food you have no idea what it is. Air Berlin also had very nice hot towels. Their staff really like what they do. The only minus is that they are expensive.	1
Moscow to Yekaterinburg. The flight time is 2h30min, I like Aeroflot's A320 seats, all types. The new one, are the best one, they have iPad and phone holders, power outlets etc. But this plane was 8 years old, but the cabin looks like it is new. On this 2:30 flight, you receive sandwich, candy bar, an apple and drinks (tea, coffee, different juices, and water) All is nice. Cabin was clean and crew were super-friendly!	1
Brussels to Moscow. Not my first flight with Aeroflot. And each time I'm surprised by 5-star onboard service: very polite and attentive flight attendants, always an extra attention for passengers with kids, on board beverages are foreseen for all class passengers, even on very short flight (from Bru to SVO: soft drinks and juice, fresh salad, scone, cheese, butter, bread, warm and very tasty meat or poultry dish, side dish, dessert, tea or coffee - all is tasty en fresh! This is just to compare the ticket of other EU companies who will not serve you anything unless higher class and so much more expensive ticket or on board extra purchases for snacks, and not a full meal). Fleet is super new, clean, again if compare with EU famous airlines. Looks like their high standards of service just grow and do not drop. Concerning the arrival and departure times, all is on time. Even if delayed at a/p of departure due to airtraffic of other (not by Aeroflot depending reason), the arrival time will be same! I can only advise this airline, perfect!	1
Excellent flight. This was quite different from the outbound KL-Almaty 10 days ago which was delayed 6 hours. The biz class is configured in 1-2-1, so every pax has his/her own aisle. The bed is flat at 180 degree (unlike the Air Astana 757). The service and food were excellent. While the TV screen was big, the choice of movies could have been improved. Air Astana, after the incidents with the outbound flight delay (Almaty - KL), you have redeemed yourself thanks to two of your very dedicated managers in the Kuala Lumpur operation. In addition, your b-class product in 767 is also way better than that of 757.	1
Excellent service from Air Astana team. A very pleasant flight of just under 4 hours flying from Moscow to Almaty. Service was exceptional and the crew very attentive. A very smooth flight and pilot was very careful with manoeuvres. Overall I was very impressed with this airline and felt very safe.	1
Tehran to Tashkent via Almaty. At the moment I am in transit at Almaty airport (not the best airport to spend the night) but Air Astana pleased me on the flight from Tehran to Almaty. It is the first time I have flown with this airline. Excellent, punctual, well turned out crew. Polite. Clean toilets. Amazing service.	1
Excellent service by the cabin crew and the ground crew. They went1 beyond their responsibilities and helped me do the check in for another flight to EU country and communicate with another airport. They are kind and truly helpful! I have been using their service for several years now and I never had a negative experience with them.	1
The flight was on time and arrived ahead of schedule. The cabin crew were courteous and efficient. One piece of my checked in luggage did not arrive and one of the flight attendants personally assisted me in filing a report. Despite all this I was able to board a bus departing 30 minutes after my scheduled arrival time. Thank you Aer Lingus	1
Moscow to Geneva. One of my favourite airlines. Good service, food and aircraft. Aeroflot has the world's newest aircraft fleet. The main Russian hub airports could be somewhat better I suppose, but that's not exactly the airline's fault. In any case, they're decent.	1
Whilst my journey from Bishkek to Alamaty was short, I found the flight to be a very pleasant event. The aircraft was quite modern and the seating was very comfortable. The safety advisory video was modern, novel and refreshing, rather than the traditional rushed human version. I found the Air Astana staff to be very pleasant and helpful. I would have no hesitation in recommending Air Astana for future flights.	1
Check-in procedure carried out professionally by extremely polite and communicative staff. Hand luggage was checked to ensure compliance with Aegean 's terms and conditions which it did. Breezed through Passport control despite the terminal being quite busy. Ample and polite staff kept queues short. Aegean Airlines terminal was spotlessly clean with ample duty free shopping available. Amazing authentic Greek food products like Greek baklava, feta and extra virgin olive oils were on promotion. Had to buy some. Boarding was orderly and we were greeted at aircraft door by immaculately dressed cabin crew. I am always impressed by how professional Aegean Airlines cabin crew are. They put Turkish Airlines crews to shame. On time departure with on board service of drinks and meal again served in a very professional and polite manner with a smile. Duty free trolley appeared after the meal service. Smooth flight, landed 20 minutes early. Excellent service from start to finish. Thoroughly recommended.	1
This is a great connection between Almaty and Pavlodar allowing a return trip within 24 hours. I left Almaty for Pavlodar at 6.30 pm on Thursday and was back next day at 5 pm. Although I flew both ways on a smaller Embraer-190 plane, the flight was not long at all taking around 1h 40m in one direction. Both flights were on time, no delays whatsoever. The flight attendants were very friendly and welcoming. It was great to see that it is possible to use the KCTV flight entertainment on this flight via a mobile device - excellent service which will hopefully become available on all Air Astana airplanes. Overall a very good experience and thanks to Air Astana for maintaining high standards of performance on regional flights like this one.	1
I was traveling to Stockholm, always with Aegean which for me is the top airline in Europe. It is not only service, the friendly and professional staff but also, one of the few airlines that offer meals included in the ticket price. And the meals are really great. In this flight a big surprise was the desert offered on the menu of the flight, Greeks call it "pasteli" which is a traditional sweet with honey and sesame seeds. The one of the flight, Navarino Icons Pasteli, was exceptional!!! It was so tasty, fresh and I was surprised that looking for the brand I discovered that it is a product of Costa Navarino which is a luxury sustainable destination and resorts and the opposite of an industrial product.	1
Phuket to Moscow. Our travel agency messed up and misinformed about our flight time so we missed our flight. The airport worker in Phuket Airport (Russian) helped us organize alternative flight quickly. Without his help we would have waited for 2 days for another flight. He really helped us. Best airport worker.	1
Rome to Moscow. Super, flew business class, was really surprised with the quality of service. From moment got into the plane the level of professional service was great. I have flown the same leg on economy two years ago the level of service was the same.	1
St Petersburg to Kamenogorsk via Astana, flights were in time. Cabin was clean, food was good, especially on the way from LED to TSE and service excellent. Inflight entertainment before I boarded, I got app KCTV to use aboard, this app for cabin WiFi. For me selection of movies should be wider, but when your trip just about 3-4 hours, it is enough. In some planes they still don't have WiFi or captain forgets to turn it on. New terminal in Astana is very good but for passengers flying to countries from former USSR, which now are Customs Union members they don't sell even water in duty free stores because of union's rules (they can't sell alcohol and all stuff with additional tax fee).	1
Hong Kong to Almaty with Air Astana was amazing. Business class has extremely comfortable beds with your choice of a regular blanket or a lovely plush duvet. Food is terrific with at least four choices for the main course, lovely appetizers and soup. The flight attendants and crews cannot do enough to make you at home. The magazine and media selection is wonderful. Traveling with my eight-year-old daughter was especially nice. Air Astana has an amazing National Geographic branded children's kit which was a huge hit!	1
Almaty to Bangkok. New plane, nice crew and very good service. I travel with family and also like treatment of my small children - they provide attention, and give gifts. The travel kit in economy class is also great. Excelllent qualty. The pilot kept great contact with passengers. I am really proud of our national carrier Air Astana.	1
Aegean Airlines are the best airline in Europe. They keep on doing an amazing job. Website and application are very easy to access, cabin crew are professional. New aircrafts and clean cabin. Best value for money.	1
Prague to Ho Chi Minh via Moscow. Having seen negative reviews, we (two adults, three kids 3-10 yo) decided to leave a review here too because we found the airline was excellent in many aspects. Check-in: no hick-up. It was opened two hours before flight, maybe due to Prague's policy, not airline. We wish the airport/airlines may consider this as we found the immigration at Prague was excruciatingly slow, almost deliberately by the staff who manned the counter. We were asked numerous questions and he perused through each passport very slowly without apparent reason. We made it to the flight a few minutes after boarding time had closed despite being number four to check-in. A few travellers were also late behind us.Thankfully Aeroflot waited for us! Our baggage were checked in all the way to Ho Chi Minh where we collected each of them safely. Food: We requested Muslim food. As the PRG-MOW was below 3 hours, special meal request could not be entertained (Aeroflot's policy). This is an aspect which the airline could improve. We came well-prepared with outside food and were not told off by the steward/ess. Orange juice was particularly nice. From MOW to SGN, we were provided with Muslim meal in a very well-presented boxes. It came with halal certification information booklet by a Russian halal authorisation agency. This is much better than the handwritten or sticker of MOML as in other airlines. Aeroflot scores highly from us for ensuring total confidence over the food that they serve. In flight magazine: They certainly have listened to complaints and we are happy to report that they have an in-flight magazine in English, in addition to the thick Russian one. Good job Aeroflot! We now have Nov and Dec 2018 issues as part of our collection! In flight entertainment: Aeroflot may have the largest selection of movies to watch in addition to excellent games for kids. They also have good selection of local (Soviet and Russian) hits. Every passenger was supplied with earphones. The quality of the screen and audio was excellent. 5. For kids, they received two different sets of bag/toy/stationeries/games for the two legs of travel. Very nice bag that my youngest keeps wearing everyday even after a week off the plane! Very nice touch from the Aeroflot! 6. Cabin crew were polite and gentle enough throughout the flight, at check in counter and when speaking with the kids. Amenities on board were also good including blanket, socks, soft slippers and eyemask on the MOW-SGN. Overall cabin experience was great. The flight was warm, clean and spacious enough with reclining seats, and lift-able armrest, allowing my kids to sleep on my laps. Overall Moscow Sheremetyevo experience was excellent. Immigration was polite and quick. Airport facilities were great. There is even a family room at Terminal D which could be booked for free to up to 24hrs by a family that has at least one <7 yo. It has beds for small kids and sofas for older ones, a playing room, nappy changing room, basic kitchen (for warming baby foods and hot water) and private toilet. It is manned by a personnel who just need to be shown the passports and boarding passes. We used 12 flights for this particular trip, and Aeroflot scored highest. It was a positive experience for all of us. We were not expecting this as the price was unbelievably low for PRG-SGN (below MYR1000 per person). We have no hesitant to use and to recommend Aeroflot in the future. Well done!	1
Malaga to Bangkok via Moscow Sheremetyevo airport, we booked with Aeroflot because they were the best price. The planes were new and clean, the food was very good, the attendants spoke a little English and were excellent and the on board entertainment was great. On our outbound leg we had just a 60 minute connection time to get from Terminal 4 to Terminal 2, the ground staff were helpful and guided us promptly to our next flight. Would definitely travel with Aeroflot again.	1
Trivandrum to Sharjah and return. Being a frequent flyer on this route in my opinion Air Arabia is one of the best low cost carriers I have flown. Every time the flights were on time clean and tidy with not so bad seats and leg space. Food available for purchase on board was reasonable and quite good. Overall a very good value for money and a highly dependable airline for sticking on to the schedule every time.	1
Bangalore-Sharjah. Despite leaving at ungodly hours 3.30am in my case this is probably one of my favourite low cost carriers and in my opinion better than some full service airlines that fly from the middle east to India. Plane was clean and service was excellent plane half empty so had whole row to sleep. Since leaving so early in the morning lights are switched off early overall happy with the service Air Arabia provides.	1
Moscow to Almaty, A321 is new aircraft with about 32 seats in business, not flat bed but for the 4 hours flight, the seat is enough. The food is good. Rich variety and tasty. Services of flight attendants are very nice, attentive and good. The entertainment system is provided through IPADs, it is good choice, but I would increase the number of the product -if you travel often, you watch everything. Generally, in my experience, it is always on time.	1
I was flying from London to Almaty via Istanbul with Turkish Airlines. I had planned to arrive in Almaty 3 days before the wedding. However, due to the heavy snow fall, the airport at Istanbul closed. I was stranded, without my luggage, and so worried that I would not arrive in time for my wedding as the earliest flight Turkish Airlines could offer was on the day of my wedding. My fiancé saw Air Astana were able to fly earlier and bought me a ticket. I was stranded, without my luggage, not knowing what was happening and when I would be arriving with my fiancé but Air Astana were wonderful and very professional. The cabin crew were a credit to Air Astana. I will certainly fly again with them and recommend.	1
Personnel au sol et navigant très agréable et attentif. Bonne ponctualité . Les sièges sont confortables en économie tout comme en sleeper eco . Très bonne qualité de services de manière générale . Les repas sont également de qualité. Le transit à Astana est très facile et les connexions sont bonnes. Très bon rapport qualité prix pour cette compagnie que je recommande vivement. Staff on the ground and navigator very pleasant and attentive. Good punctuality. The seats are comfortable in economy as in sleeper eco. Very good quality of services in general. Meals are also quality. The transit to Astana is very easy and the connections are good. Very good value for money for this company that I highly recommend.	1
Overall a great service from Berlin to Chicago with Air Berlin. Full recline seats. Purser took much care. The meals where in very good quality and served in a good way. Wine corresponded perfectly. The entertainment could be a little more extensive and the remote was a little cumbersome. But overall service was great!	1
Flying Aeroflot SU2103 from Riga to Moscow Sheremetyevo. Excellent service right from the boarding in Riga to the disembarking in Moscow. Pleasant staff, great food (despite this is a relatively short flight), enough legroom and individual entertainment. Flight was on time. Very pleasant.	1
Bangkok to Almaty return. First time flying with Air Astana and was incredibly impressed. The service from ticketing, check in to on board was exceptional. Travelling with a baby can often be tiring and stressful however they accommodated our needs every step of the way. On return we had a quick transfer in BKK to another airline. Air Astana staff were able check our luggage right through to the final destination & tagged it to ensure ground crew knew of the urgency. All went very smoothly and we made connections with zero fuss and our bags arrived first on carousel. I highly recommend Air Astana and look forward to flying them again.	1
Bangkok to Almaty. I travelled with the Air Astana for the first time and it exceeded my expectations. The airline staff was responsive and extremely attentive. No issue with any request.  The food variety and quality was outstanding (I am considered to be picky).  The seats were very comfortable whether you wish to sleep or watch a movie. It was the best flight experience I have had.	1
Bangkok to Almaty. Traveling on an airline for the first time, with a 1-year-old child is one of the more stressful things you can do, but Air Astana made it an absolute breeze. The service we received on the flight was excellent. The food menu was extensive and varied and the drinks menu was the same. The inflight entertainment was extensive and current and the seats were comfortable (I'm 100kg and 6'2"). Nothing was too hard for the staff, they were  the friendliest hosties I've ever encountered. We will be back.	1
Air Astana is improving. Even domestic flight was perfect: smiling crew, clean cabin. when they run out of one of drinks stewardess apologized a few times. The weakest thing in Air Astana is inflight entertainment: no personal screens. But they  put wi-fi and suggesting to download app before flight, so, before boarding just get the app!	1
Zurich to New York return via Berlin Tegel in Business Class. This was an amazing experience and everything went according to plan. The crews were friendly and professional. I am a Star Gold as well as a One World Emerald member and in my opinion Air Berlin and Etihad are ahead of the competition with their personalized service concept in business class (no lights on for two hours after take off and then again two hours before landing and a personalized inflight service concept, on demand with no disturbing factors. An outstanding product with just 19 seats in business class. I could also use the AA first class lounge at JFK which is new and amazing. I would strongly recommend Air Berlin.	1
We had a return flight from Moscow SVO to Guangzhou by Aeroflot, we had a business class tickets. It was very nice, pleasant crew, very nice food, some Russian and Chinese dishes like Borsch and Chinese set, also I ordered a big portion of ice cream.  Aeroflot use 2 varieties of A330-300, one I flew in October  2017 was an old one, the seas have less legroom than new one, but not bad, they made in orange colors only and the recline is 160, it not full flat, but in the same time, it is one of the most coziest one. On the new cabins such as I flew are full-flat beds, they made of orange cloth with blue leather parts, because of it, it looks less cozy but it still very comfortable.Aeroflot has one of the best IFE, unfortunately it is little bit slow. Very nice amenity kits also provided onboard. I think Aeroflot is one of the best airlines.	1
The flight was amazing and the crew was very kind and friendly. The cabin was clean and spacious. It was a short flight so only a bottle of water was offered. Embarking and disembarking was coordinated really well to avoid crowding and spread of COVID-19.	1
Last minute trip to Athens with Aegean. Check in procedure was a breeze. All Covid compliance checks ok. Boarding was quick, polite , mask wearing crew greeting passengers. Snack served on smooth flight. Landed early, good announcements from cockpit. Nice service from cabin crew. Cleared immigration quickly in Athens. Suitcases arrived on belt undamaged. Great trip. Thoroughly recommended.	1
Aegean check-in was busy but agents were polite, professional and not stressed. Passport control and Covid checks were handled well. Great selection of duty free at Athens Airport. Boarding was efficient and welcomed by mask wearing crew. Clean, new A320 NEO inside and outside. On time departure, clear announcements from the cockpit. Smooth flight, snack served. Crew carried out cabin checks for mask compliance with courtesy. Landed early. A superb flight from a wonderful crew and great airline. Well done Aegean in these difficult times. Thoroughly recommended.	1
New York JFK to Berlin. Great service and friendly crew. When I booked, I saw some people reporting bad reviews about them, I was sceptical. I must say I was beyond happy and grateful that I flew with them.	1
Prague to Moscow SVO. First time on Aeroflot, great experience. Aeroflot might be the last true business class for short/medium haul in Europe. I booked economy assuming the business class seats would be the standard coach with the middle seat left empty as with BA, AF, SAS etc. Nice to see someone flying with the 2+2 layout common for business class in North America. Enough space to actually get a laptop out and get some work done. Gate agents in Prague were friendly and quick, equipment (A321) was brand new. Flight crew spoke perfect English and friendlier than I'm used to on domestic flights at home.	1
It is the first time I took Air Astana to Istanbul. Time was quite convenient, working hours I spent in office and arrived late evening. Enough time for rest and to be fresh in the morning. The food is good, with the great variety and taste. Service is very good, the staff is very attentive. The entertainment system is the ipad provided by the airline which is good solution. But I might say the choice is a bit limited. If you fly a lot, you watch everything good and start to watch international movies that not bad too.	1
I am French and thought before that there is no better way to fly than Air France or Lufthansa. Since i am in Kazakhstan (2 years) Air Astana is for me now the number one before European airlines. The service and welcome is perfect, food is really good and most of the time, flights are on time! The fidelity programm is very flexible and very attractive.	1
Efficient and polite check-in, hassle free passport control and Covid compliance procedures. Attentive, welcoming cabin crew greeting all passengers upon boarding and all wearing masks. Informative announcements from cockpit pre departure. On time take off, box meal with water served and regular checks by cabin crew to ensure make compliance by passengers. Smooth flight with good selection of inflight entertainment and updates from cockpit. Landed early with understandable instructions from crew regarding arrivals and Covid procedures in hall. Bags appeared on belt within 20 minutes. Excellent flight, great crew. Very professional. Thoroughly recommended.	1
Almaty to Astana with Air Astana, the flight was a bit late, but the staff announced the reason for the delay and we managed to arrive in Astana nearly on scheduled time. The crew was super friendly and attentive. The pilot had a good sense of humour and made everyone smile while making announcements to the passengers. Thanks Air Astana.	1
Kiev to Delhi via Almaty with Air Astana. I am writing to share for comfortable plane, great variety of food, kind and polite employees on night flight 29th - 30th December 2015. My flight was also easy on timing with less than 1 hour waiting time in Almaty.  I appreciate for great service at least 50% cheaper tickets than European or Arabian airlines. (Bought tickets 12 days before departure date).	1
Totally disagree with the previous review. I must congratulate Aegean with all their Covid procedures. Check-in was quick, efficient and polite. Boarding conducted in an orderly manner with All cabin crew wearing masks and ensuring that passengers complied with the strict measures with announcements on the PA system. Box meal provided with bottled water and regular checks by cabin crew to ensure mask wearing by passengers. Smooth flight, regular updates from cockpit. Landed early, hassle free arrival with reminders about compliance with Covid rules upon entry to Greece. Well done Aegean, great airline to travel with. A 4 star Covid safe carrier.	1
I was disappointed many times by other airlines (wich I find ethical not to mention here) during these pandemic period. Surprisingly, I had very good experience with Aegean in every stage - from speaking to customer service to changing my ticket and getting alternative solutions to my problems. I what to thank the team with polite ladies on the phone and give you an excellent rating. Good luck!	1
Dusseldorf to Los Angeles in Business class. Outstanding experience today. Amazing cabin crew with attention to detail. Great food choices as well and very comfortable seats. Enjoyed the inflight entertainment system as well. Usually fly on Lufthansa or Swiss but Air Berlin is much better in business class in my opinion.	1
We have been surprised by new jets for summer destinations, equipped with modern entertainment, personal ipad with a variety of programs. Quality of meal and drinks onboard is good. Service on board is excellent. Crew were very professional. I can frankly say that these flights were very pleasant for our family and we would fly with Air Astana again.	1
Flight from Shymkent to Kuala Lumpur via Almaty and back in April. On vacation we were hospitalized with fever and skipped our flight home. Air Astana appreciated our position and changed dates for our unreturnable tickets without charge, so we could come home later. Great thanks for help, now we are your loyal clients.	1
26 April Tashkent-Almaty flight KS128 and 5th May Almaty-Tashkent flight KS127. Embraer 160 from Tashkent-Almaty-Tashkent. Excellent service on Board. It was at a high level starting from check-in to landing. Flight attendants were very neat and friendly also pleased with the print media. Even given candy during takeoff and landing as well as a pillow which were very nice.	1
Astana-Istanbul-Astana on March 16-18 2015. It was one of my best flight experiences starting from check-in inflight meal offering and friendly approach of flight attendants. It was worth every cent I paid.	1
I recently flew return from BKK to ALA. It was the first time I've flown Air Astana and I have to say that I was delighted with the attentive anticipatory levels of service I received. The plane itself looked brand new the business class cabin was spotless and a true delight to sit in. While the inflight entertainment was not as extensive as higher profile airlines this wasn't an issue for me. The dining experience was excellent quality varied food presented fantastically. The service and the environment along with the punctuality made this an excellent first experience of an airline that is clearly having an effect in the region.	1
ZRH to JFK via DUS in C. Excellent C service and product on both legs as always. Arrival in JFK 20 minutes ahead of schedule. After hundreds of short and longhaul flights in C and F with LH and LX I recently switched to Air Berlin for transatlantic flights after a satus macht from HON to AB Platinum. Really like the AB business product a lot more: 19 C seats only, proper lie flat seats and certainly not with cheap air cushions, no cheap trolleys coming down the aisle but proper restaurant style service with excellent foods and wines, very helpful, friendly and professional crews etc.. Last but not least, it usually only takes me about 10 minutes from the door of the plane to the taxi stand at JFK Terminal 8 wheras it can easily take 2 hours at the other terminals, specifically at the International Terminal 4. Finally, AB platinum status = Oneworld Emerald allows for First Class Lounge access across the entire Oneworld network with all Oneworld carriers as well as Etihad.	1
Moscow to Krasnodar. Great experience with Aeroflot. Very professional check in with a smile, New, clean aircraft, beautiful friendly crew. Very smooth boarding, great quality and very clear passenger announcements. I had a sandwich and apple juice for an in-flight meal, but it was only two hour flight, so it was enough for me. Overall, great airline.	1
12/2/15 KS942/952 London - Almaty. 21/2/15 KS601/941 Almaty - London. You really get the feeling with Air Astana that the company is genuinely striving for improvement all the time. Staff are extremely courteous and helpful planes are really clean flights generally arrive on time. The new economy sleeper is a winning option for people who dread the loss of a nights sleep but cannot bring themselves to fork out the full business class fare. I travelled with my four children and we all thought economy sleeper was brilliant. At least a chance of sleep much more space quieter cabin and better food that in economy.	1
Flight KC929 20 February. Was an overnight flight. Flight left on time and cabin crew were extremely thoughtful. Placed blanket over me while sleeping and when woke even though food service had finished and on way to landing - they found an apple to give me. Was a great experience and very impressed by cabin crew attitude.	1
I found this routing from HK-Almaty very convenient and have done it a couple of times now. Direct flight airport close to city and city close to ski fields. Great value for money. Well maintained aircraft good attention to service - what more do you need.	1
ALA-TSE. B757-200 not new AC but fully refurbished to perfection. Clean and inviting. Crew very well groomed wonderful IFE tasty hot snack on this 80 min flight. Temp however was very high in the cabin and my req to lower it a bit were not fulfilled. I started to feel ill and asked for ice to cool my head crew showed no empathy or care. I was glad it was a short flight.	1
IST-TSE-BKK (and back) on A321 and B767 first airplane saws its years the other one is great new and comfortable. The service from the staff was great. Very personalized friendly and they spoke fluent English. There was not IFE on A321 but 2 movies were on drop down screens. Excellent IFE on B767 with HD screens and good variety of movies TV series games. Food was very tasty and plenty of alcoholic drinks beverages coffee/tea. They offer newspapers and amenities kits. Great airline to fly with TSE airport small but new and clean.	1
I required assistance on flights from Edinburgh via Athens to Santorini, and on my return , I would like to thank all of your staff at every stage of my journey, they were excellent on every level and made my journey so easy and were pleasant and made me feel comfortable, thank you all so much	1
Sofia to Berlin Tegel. Being my airline, as their Platinum member I must say that we do have a really complicated relationship. I fly them a lot inside Europe and the service is really depending on who is in the crew. It can be a delightful experience or it could be a disaster, although I must say that in the last year you can feel some change inside the management and the service is improving and becoming good, therefore I trust them and give them 10 points for the change they are developing. Some might say that paying for the snacks and drinks it is a downside but I do think that for flights shorter then 2h you really don't need all these. The prices they offer are OK and the quality of the products has improved. You still get the chocolate heart when exiting the aircraft. The planes they got after the restructuring are in very good shape. Not mentioning that the flights are almost all the time landing on time or even before schedule. It is still very difficult to use their website in order to buy tickets and this needs improvement. The mobile apps are sometimes too long under maintenance and you cannot use all the features, but at least people are well informed about it. I really hope this airline will get back on track because in my opinion is the best German airline and it brings up the spirit of Berlin (those living in this city probably know what I mean).	1
New York to Moscow. I wanted to say thank you from the bottom of my heart to an Aeroflot representative who was sincerely helpful during booking of my flight to Moscow at JFK on April 7th 2018. She proved to be very knowledgeable, professional and determined in helping her customer (me), who needed a great deal of support, and direction in that difficult time. Hope all people who fly Aeroflot can experience this very memorable and touching side of humanity.	1
I took six flights over two weeks London-Astana Astana-Almaty and Almaty to Tashkent and all of them were very good and I was impressed with the staff quality of food and video/TV system. The flight between Astana and London both ways wasn't very busy and the planes were very modern and well maintained. It was a pleasure and relaxing to fly with them.	1
7 Feb from ALA To IST. I travel internationally and domestically frequently. Based on my experience Air Astana is a cut above the rest. As a person who is afraid of flying it is a pleasure to see the rapid modernization of the fleet. I am 193cm tall and leg room is important for me Air Astana usually offers the most. The inflight entertainment is current and changes frequently. Lastly I have found the cabin crew to be very supportive. there was one occasion where I complained about the temperature of the cabin being too hot and the senior flight attendant had a customer complaint book where she recorded my complaint. A great initiative which I have never experienced on other airlines.	1
Aegean is my favorite Greek Airline. In July 2019 I travelled from Munich to Athens. Aegean aircraft was perfect also seat was perfect. Landed on time at Athens Airport with smooth landing.	1
It was the best air trip. Aegean Airlines occured a flight from Brussels to Athens without any cancellation in addition to other airlines. (During the period of covid 19). The crew was gentle and ready to make us feel comfortable. The second trip that i did from Athens to Rhodes surprised me a lot, as it occurred with three only passengers. Me and two other passengers, it makes me extremely impression. I really appreciate Aegean customer service and policy and i hope to make another air trip with this airline soon.	1
Ala-Astana KC 683 back Astana Almaty KC 954 Almaty-Atyrau (Guriev) - KC 889B Atyrau (Guriev) - Almaty KC 890-B. Good service. Perfect take off and landings. Air Astana continues to work on their services and airfleet and I continue to see an ongoing positive development of the company. Some destinations are more expensive than others but generally good value for money.	1
I fly Air Astana very often almost every week nowadays. I find the experience with new 767 ER relaxing though the flights between Astana and Almaty are always full. The ground staff keep improving. Seems new planes brought a fresh spirit on board. 767 Business Class is great and gives privacy to the customers. Looking forward to flying the Dreamliner. Food is much better than before.	1
Los Angeles to Moscow. My mom was visiting me in the States and it was her time to go back home to Russia. I was worried about her travel because she does not speak English and long layover time. Today, when my mom arrived home, I called her and was shocked in a good way with her amazing experience of the entire flight. She was assisted by the LA airport's staff and taken on the wheelchair exactly to the Aeroflot gate. Upon arriving to Moscow, she was met by a Sheremetevo airport's staff again who took her to a waiting room on the wheelchair again. The layover time was more than six hours and I was afraid that my mom would be very tired and even fall asleep and miss her flight to the home town. How wonderful I felt by knowing that my mom spent the entire time at a clean and very comfortable waiting room where she could rest until her next flight. My mom said the staff was extremely professional, polite, nice, and showed that the passengers' comfort and safety were their number one priority. I want to thank Aeroflot for making those great changes and keeping our Russian airlines at the high level! Regards and deepest respect.	1
I travel very frequently on Air Astana from Delhi-Almaty. Check-in staff at Delhi and Almaty are very efficient. I had a wonderful experience on 18 April flying from Delhi to Almaty. The flight crew went out of their way to take care of passengers needs.	1
April 4 KC951 from Almaty to Astana. Return April 4 from Astana to Almaty KC854. Had the pleasure of flying Air Astanas new 767 service between Astana and Almaty. It was the best domestic economy class service I have flown. Each seat has in seat videos with the latest films tv music etc. I had a choice of international newspapers as well as a warm sandwich and drink. As usual the crew were smiling multi lingual and well dressed. The seats had a good tilt.	1
Flight KC912 April 2nd from Istanbul to Almaty. It was a fantastic flight crew helpful and smiling. All announcements very clear understandable and most important things for me multi-language Turkish English Russian and Kazakh. The way aircraft was new.	1
I have been using the services of Air Astana for years. Always a pleasure to travel starting from the convenient way of purchasing the ticket and excellent relation of crew members. I quite often take the domestic flights around two times a month and therefore comfort is crucial for me. In January I travelled to Frankfurt from Astana. As usual right from boarding until landing it was an enjoyable journey.	1
Thessaloniki to Berlin via Athens. This was one of my best flights with Aegean. Second time to enjoy the service from a great purser. Always smiling and very professional. Perfect!	1
My son and I flew from Chicago to Dublin, Ireland on June 23rd returned Dublin Chicago July 23rd. We flew to see a sick parent and their flights were reasonable. I wish Aer Lingus flew from Atlanta (we had to fly from Atlanta to Chicago) to Dublin - they are incredible! The flight going to Dublin was so comfortable and the food was lovely but the staff on both flights were also incredible. The staff couldn’t do enough to make the trip great! The captains and assistants flew us safely and checked in during the flight. Also want to mention Dublin Airport for friendly staff and especially Martina from Duty Free - she was incredibly helpful. Security was thorough and friendly also. Keep up the great work Aer Lingus!	1
Flying from Almaty to KL KC935 was very good we had an excellent inflight meal and the staff on the plane were helpful and friendly. The seats were comfortable and the leg room was good. I was able to check in online and then at the airport changed my seat to the emergency exit seats due to the extra leg room with no problems at all. Kuala Lumpur is fantastic and as we head towards George Town we are looking forward to exploring more of Malaysia and of course the return flight with Air Astana.	1
Flight KC907 March 21st and back on KC908 March 26th. I flew with my family from Almaty to Delhi and back and we were all very happy with the flights. The crew was nice and attentive departures were on time and we really enjoyed the time onboard.	1
I was lucky enough to be on one of Air Astana's new Boeing 767s returning from Bangkok to Almaty on the 12th January 2014. My business class seat was worth paying the extra over economy with the full lay flat seat and lots of room to spread out with a wide side table. Over the time I've been flying Air Astana I have seen them polishing their cabin service and the professionalism and presentation of the staff is of a high standard. Beverage service was very good although the food let the otherwise excellent travel experience down a little the meal was below par for business class. This was in contrast to the trip down to Bangkok and all previous international flights with Air Astana where the food has been very good.	1
My family of 2 adults and 2 children flew from Astana to Abu Dhabi (non-stop) and back via Almaty. Although it was a New year vacation period with heavy passenger load all services - starting with tickets sales to luggage delivery were efficient and precise. On our way back we flew a brand new Boeing-767 and it was the best plane I have taken so far. We had to stay in Almaty for a night because of the weather conditions and "Air Astana" provided us with great rooms in a downtown hotel and round trip transfer. Staff were polite professional and competitive.	1
I travelled with my family on the ALA-BKK flight on Dec 15 2013 and back on the BKK-ALA flight on Jan 4 2014 and both flights were on their brand new 767. The seat comfort was the best I have ever experienced in Economy and the leg room was significantly more spacious than in other economy cabins. Both flights were on time and despite very full flights the service was very efficient and pleasant.	1
Athens to Kiev. Among the top European airlines. Price is always reasonable and service is always perfect. I never had any problem and I always choose when available.	1
Lisbon to Athens. One more time with Aegean! Excellent as always, on time, crew friendly and approachable, hot meal and drinks for free, clean aircraft. Don't know if you need more from an airline if you fly in Europe	1
My husband took a turn and was poorly he couldn't get onto the aircraft by himself the cabin crew organised help who where absolutely amazing they also organised help when we arrived at East Midlands. The staff and cabin crew went far beyond the call of duty and exceeded our expectation. I cannot thank them enough. When I asked for help they wanted to ensure we were well looked after and we were 110%. The ground staff and cabin were the best I have ever experienced.	1
Moscow to Warsaw. A new plane and good service on board. I was amazed, when I called for a stewardess to ask for a water, and she came with water even having heard my request. She assumed in advance that I need a water when landing. Aeroflot is definitely one of the best carriers in Europe!	1
I travelled with Air Astana business class from Kuala Lumpur to Almaty on Sunday October 20th 2013. The whole experience was very enjoyable and comfortable. The cabin crew were very pleasant and helpful and the service was excellent. The food was particularly enjoyable and I was able to relax and enjoy the trip back to Almaty after a hectic week in KL.	1
I take Air Astana flights on regular basis local and international economy and business. There are a lot of modern new air planes that are being added continuously to Air Astana. The service is much more pleasant and more active inside the plane because the crew are very young comparing to KLM British Airways Lufthansa. The food is comparatively much better than other international airlines. In some planes they have some seats that are very unusual but comfortable you can sleep on them very easy and comfortable. On the international flight prices they are very reasonable. I'm definitely recommending use Air Astana.	1
When reading the bad reviews I almost decided not to book with them. But so glad I did. My experience was perfect.  Staff was friendly and took all the needed measures to hygiene & safety by wearing masks and cleaning toilets multiple times during the flight. Every meal had a little bag of alcogel and all middle seats were kept empty. I had a stop-over in Mexico-City, without having to pick up luggage. It all arrived perfectly in my final destination! The inflight entertainment and the food are somewhat limited, but still good enough. I have no complaints and would even rate this flight better than several other American Airlines I've flown with. Especially as the ticket had the price of a low-budget airline.	1
A big shout out to Margaret who was working on the Aer Lingus ticket desk on friday last 28th August. You dealt with my sister Debrah who was flying to Boston that day. We had a race against time to get extra paperwork. The code of conduct, customer service, empathy, understanding and compassion were second to none. I always knew Aer Lingus  were known to treat their customers with care and thats exactly what you did, you proved that right. Aer Lingus this lady is a splendid representative of your company and she should win employee of the year.	1
Flight LED-ALA. The new aircraft in rather good condition although seats are very used in economy class. Sensible costs good service on board friendly crew and tasty meal. The traveler mini-bag was given consisted of toothbrush toothpaste a bandage for sleeping and a pair of socks. On-board entertainment was rather good also pillows for more comfort were provided by default. These airlines will be my choice for future trips to KZ.	1
Round trip HKG-ALA-SVO. Meals tasted good. Staff Service excellent both inside and outside the flight. Staff in transfer lounge nice and helpful. Before my return trip from SVO-HKG I had a flight from Riga to SVO with Aeroflot. When I arrived at ALA for transfer the staff of Air Astana suspected and asked if I had any checked luggage. I said I had and Aeroflot had already transferred it to Air Astana as they told me so. He said my luggage was not with the flight according to their record. He also went out to see if my luggage was at claim lounge. He couldn't find mine so took me to report lost baggage. 15 mins after reporting the loss I was waiting for my next flight in departure lounge. My luggage was found at SVO airport. Staff in transfer lounge were professional and helpful.	1
Cairo to Prague via Athens, friendly staff (cabin crew, check in employees), great service, hot food served , clean aircraft. Not the first time with Aegean Airlines and they are always improving, keep up the great work. You deserve to be the best airline in Europe.	1
Aegean Airlines has a consistently good service that ranges from customer service on the phone center to very friendly and welcoming cabin crew. The flight left on time, the airplane was spotlessly clean and pilot provided information several times. Food during flight was delicious. The only negative thing I can mention is the crowded lounge (which otherwise has a great choice of food and beverages) in the mornings when several Aegean airplanes are departing at the same time. In general, flying Aegean is always a pleasant experience for me with a good value for money.	1
Athens to Sofia. Excellent value for the money I paid (93 Canadian dollars). Seats were comfortable, airplane was clean, great staff service. This is the 3d time I take them. I flew with Aegean 3 years ago and once again they deliver and are worthy of their 4 star rating. I was not expecting food to be offered on this flight make sure you make your meal request well in advance, otherwise there may not be anything vegetarian. (This was my fault). All I can say is that the food looked like it was good quality and they offer a reasonable selection of beverages.	1
Moscow to Tivat at the end of summer. Flight was well served and food were fine. Staff was helpful. I use the loyalty program of the airline and this makes my flight even more pleasant and cheap. Don't miss a chance to fly with Aeroflot.	1
Athens to Moscow. My flight was operated by Airbus A321 and was completely full. The seats were very comfortable, the warm breakfast was excellent served both in quantity. It seems that flight attendants have significantly improved their knowledge of English. The plane took off and landed on time. I definitely recommend flying Aeroflot.	1
ALA-KZO. return. Service was pleasant and efficient. Very polite and professional staff onboard. Food was good but could have been a little better.	1
Dushanbe - Almaty in business class. A Western standard experience including attentive and friendly cabin crew and excellent food. On time departure and arrival. This short trip was a relaxing moment in a busy day plus got some work done in the spacious seat. The seat armrest was broken though so hopefully a repair was due just after this flight.	1
Almaty to Hong Kong and back. It was smooth no delays. 757 of Air Astana’s fleet has good business class with quite comfortable seats - almost flat. Good food and service. Inflight entertainment is ok they provide Ipads which is quite convenient.	1
KC902- flight from London to Astana. No delay at all. The seat was quite comfortable staff service excellent I was served some traditional Kazakhstan food and it was delicious. There wasn't much inflight entertainment. This airline is the best way to access Kazakhstan.	1
ATH - LHR, 8 September 2019. Check in was a breeze at the very comfortable Athens International Airport. Polite and friendly Aegean staff on hand to assist with Self Check in counters. A smile and a sense of humour made the process easy and informative. No excess charges necessary for luggage. I really don't understand people who post reviews on here and bemoan the fact that they have to pay extra if their bags exceed the permitted baggage allowance. You will have to pay more regardless of airline so use your common sense and educate yourself about your permitted allowance. Boarding was undertaken in an orderly manner. Greeted at the aircraft door with a very warm welcome by immaculate looking cabin crew. Flawless hair and make up. Elegant and functional uniform. Departed with a 20 minute delay. Drink service commenced shortly after followed by a very tasty, hot and well presented vegetarian meal. One of the best I have experienced. Great service from the crew. Aegean is one of the few airlines in Europe that offers a full service on board and is to be congratulated. Landed 5 minutes ahead of schedule. Great flight, excellent crew. Shall definately be flying Aegean Airlines again. Good job.	1
Flew with Aegean from Athens to Catania. The flight with Aegean was once again exceptional. Modern aircraft, very friendly and helpful crew, entertainment system (Aegean Stream). The FAs managed very good work despite the full cabin. The food was nice (sandwiches), yet I would like to have a hot meal on shorter intl routes, as most flights with Aegean. The only thing I can complain about is the boarding procedure. During both boarding in ATH and disembarkation in CTA we used buses, despite the fact that there were available jetbridges in Catania airport. Overall a very good flight, with value for money (108 EUROS during high season).	1
Dublin to Chicago. Aer Lingus was very understanding and flexible during the coronavirus pandemic. We needed to change our flight once the UK and Ireland ban went into effect. They were helpful and quick with the change, at no extra fees. The flight attendants and crew were so pleasant and happy to help during our flight which helped ease our stress levels. I would recommend Aer Lingus and continue to fly with them in the future.	1
ALA-BKK on 13th February 2013 returning on 17th February 2013. Offered a business class upgrade on boarding. The flat bed seats were brilliant for an overnight flight as was the meal drinks selection and level of customer service. A relaxing journey which went quickly due to the level of comfort and service. On the return journey I was in the economy seat I had originally purchased. I slept almost all the way and with my seat fully reclined I was able to stretch my legs out fully. There was certainly more legroom available than on other airlines I have flown into and out of Almaty and Kazakhstan itself. The meal was a lovely Thai chicken curry. The service was great and the drinks trolley was always in service.	1
Sofia to Beirut via Athens. Once again an amazing experience with this airline. Flights on time, hot meal (on 1h 20’ flight), comfortable seats, clean cabin, friendly and professional crew. This is why Aegean has been my first choice in recent years. I hope they keep up the good service they are offering and do not downgrade. Frankly, I can’t say anything bad. Love Aegean.	1
We were booked on flight AB3165 on May 27th from Faro to Helsinki via Berlin. We had pre-booked seats with extra legroom and some food. Although the flight was some 40 minutes late taking off we managed to make the flight to Helsinki AY918 in time. I just like to say that we had a very pleasant flight the whole way thanks to very nice cabin attendants on both flights. We fly to Faro and back about four times per year and always try fly Air Berlin. So a big thank you for looking after your customers.	1
My husband and I had a return flight to Montreal on january 14. For personal reason we needed to cancel our flights . Air Canada employee Alberto Colagrosso took care of cancelling our travel arrangements. He was courteous and efficient. With these difficult times which we are going through, people tend to be very impatient however Mr. Colagrosso was very patient and understanding. Thank you Air Canada for hiring competent employee.	1
Travelling a lot between EU and Moscow. Excellent service. Almost always on schedule. When I have the choice I always choose Aeroflot when travelling to Russia. Seats were more comfortable when Aeroflot was using the Airbus A320 for Brussels / Moscow flights and more space for legs in economy. No extra for food and drinks on medium range flights compare to competitors like Brussels Airlines. Very convenient daily overnight flight from Brussels (in addition to a day time flight) to avoid the (massive!) peak hours Moscow traffic jam.	1
After a nightmare experience with United (who rebooked us with their Star Alliance partner Aegean) including several delays, and cancellations, we arrived in Athens to no luggage, which was United's responsibility, not Aegean's. We dealt with United for four days trying to get our luggage from Newark to Athens. Eventually they told us to Taxi back to the airport and promised our luggage was there, a very kind supervisor came out and talked to us to explain the luggage was not, in fact, there. (We did not even ask for a supervisor.) He was very understanding and patient and asked us to trust him. At this point our time in Athens was over and we left the airport to board our cruise ship, thinking there was no way we'd ever get our luggage in the middle of the ocean. The next night there it was in our cabin when we opened the door! We couldn't believe it. The supervisor had gotten our luggage from Newark to Athens, then onto Santorini Island, where our Princess Cruise ship then transported it from the island and onto the ship and then to our room - all within a day. In all we went five days without luggage, but once Aegean was involved we had it within about a day, in a much more difficult route than it would have been for United to simply put it on the plane to Athens. Everyone was so compassionate and kind. But it didn't end there. Upon arriving home, I began the impossible task of dealing with United to receive compensation - they had told us to keep all receipts for the five days without luggage and we had. We spent hours on hold, hours on the phone, getting nowhere. Finally, based on the File Reference number (that I'd given them over and over and over) someone finally clued in and explained the International agreement that wherever you end up is who is responsible for the luggage. Wait, so we get to deal with Aegean again? Wonderful! I called and a kind man explained exactly what to do and gave me an email. In less than a day I got a response telling me exactly what to do to make a very easy process go smoothly. I've spent three weeks with United and got nowhere, while being treated rudely. In the last few days everything has been submitted to Aegean in a easy process with a kind person on the other end helping. We wouldn't have realized how amazing Aegean is had we not had such a bad experience through their sister airline, that only Aegean resolved, for them. Aegean went above and beyond, with every person we dealt with, they will be the first we use if at all possible.	1
I had two wonderful flights on Aegean Airlines on June 18th and on June 27th between Dusseldorf and Athens. The cabin crew was excellent: They took care of each guest, they were on both segments present at all times with a natural smile and much kindness! I‘ve flown Aegean several times and they really deserve the top ranking. From check-in till baggage-delivery everything went totally smooth! An Airline with an outstanding standard of operation. Delicious meals with a Greek touch, Greek wines and spirits as well as Cappuccino and Espresso on demand! This is truly not common even in Business Class on flights within Europe these days.	1
Dublin to Chicago. Excellent customer service today from Leah on the Premium check-in desk. Her infectious good humour set us all up for a great start to our US holiday.	1
I flew with Air Berlin for the first time on Tuesday March 29th from Munich to Berlin. It was my first time flying with Air Berlin and I had nothing to complain about. Flight price was good. Cabin service was nice. They even served you beer and chips on a 45 minute flight and gave us chocolate as you exit the plane.	1
Paris CDG to Beijing with Air China. First time flying First Class ever and the experience was just perfect. It was an evening flight and I hadn't been eating all day so the minute I stepped onto the plane I asked if they had cup noodles on board. The flight attendant immediately offered to make me one before the plane took off. So I ended up eating the best convenient noodles I've had. Other than that the service was overall very attentive and prompt. Also I really enjoyed the wine, both red and white. One thing I'd like to note is that the movie selection was quite narrow and not updated frequently (basically the same from the May selection).	1
Winnipeg to Punta Cana via Toronto. Me and my family have flown many times on Air Canada and Air Canada rouge but this has to be the best time ever. When we left Winnipeg the flight attendant noticed that my mother has trouble walking so she talked to the ground staff in Winnipeg who then called Toronto and arranged a wheel chair for her when we landed to get us to our next flight. We could have made it on our own but the compassion and care that this flight staff gave to us really made our whole family’s day.	1
Moscow to New York JFK. Checking-in took a few minutes. Fast boarding, take off on time. Very efficient service throughout. Clean cabin and lavatories. Good choice of IFE. Decent food (Kosher ordered). Overall very good impression. Unbeatable value for price. I fly this route every 2-3 month, mostly with Aeroflot - never disappointed.	1
Almaty to London. The service was pleasant and efficient KCTV was handed out as soon as seat belt signs went out so the time waiting for drinks to be served passed quickly by. As for the new wine selection this is good now that imported wines are included. The change from my first flight (Nov 2007) to now is positive.	1
Athens to Larnaca return for work. Flights full both ways and punctual. Used the app to check in - very easy and convenient - still able to choose seats, some without charge - a charge applies to the front seats or the extra leg space ones. I was traveling with hand luggage only, however decided to check it in for free. Embarkation done on time and with order. People always trying to get in as much cabin bags as they can, however personnel handled the situation well, taking some on hold and I did not see them fining anybody. Light meal and refreshments served on this 1h30min flight. The return flight was very turbulent all the way, so they served the food, but stopped the drinks service early on. The majority of the passengers did not get anything to drink. Some passengers panicking and vomiting, but the crew managed It well, calming passengers and maintaining a good spirit.	1
Glasgow to Toronto via Dublin. Weekend in Toronto for a bit of work and a birthday party, husband and I would normally fly Transat Club or Icelandair Saga. Also frequent BA Buusiness customers. After flying with Aer Lingus, we will never fly with the other carriers again if we can avoid it. From business check-in, to streamlined security and clean, well-serviced lounges - even the pairing with KLM in Toronto was excellent. Polite, well-mannered cabin crew - who could not do more for you and were friendly without being overbearing or annoying. Excellent business class seats with a massage function that reminds me of Delta First before the refurb. Could not more thoroughly recommend the Aer Lingus premium product. The entertainment suite is also excellent	1
Toronto to Fort Lauderdale. Wonderful service provided on Flight 1626 on March 1st. Blair and Freedom really went out of their way to make sure the passengers had an enjoyable flight. After a delay of over an hour the passengers were getting a bit angry but these flight attendants really worked hard to keep their passengers happy and smiled all the way through it!	1
Bucharest OTP to Moscow SVO airport. I did my checkin at home and came with printed boarding pass. At OTP airport they were not able to scan the barcode and had to "board me by hand" in their system. It's Bucharest Airport problem because in Moscow I could board with the pass printed on the same printer. Almost 3 hours fly. I flew with a new Suchoi SuperJet with 3-2 economy class seat configuration (left to right). The seats were incredibly comfortable, covered with a pleasant fabric and plenty of leg room. There was no inflight entertainment, nor wifi or usb ports, but for a short 3 hours flight that was not critical. The cabin was quiet, no disturbing noise from engines. I can not comment on food quality since I ordered a special meal (which was very very tasty - especially grechka I missed a lot). There was a decent variety of soft drinks. No alcohol on board (not even for sale).	1
St Petersburgh to Madrid via Moscow. Everything was great. The food in short flight (LED-SVO, 1h 15min) is great - fois gras with marmalade, veal with tartuffo, cake with cream of coffee. There was no delay. The business class check-in was very fast, special passageway for passport control without waiting. The business lounge is normal. The long flight was a pleasure of champagne, good food and movies. The seats are large and comfortable - you can sleep without a doubt. At the end of the flight we were given a Chinese tea as a compliment company.	1
Samos to Heraklion via Athens. Aegean Airlines is probably the best airline in Greece, and its service meets higher end companies like Air France. The seats comfortable and space is enough. They rarely have delays and its overall a great experience. The prices for regional routes are quite high, but if you can book a month or two early, you can get a fair deal. Their miles and bonus system I think is below average and generally the promotions with banks to provide cheaper or free flights usually fails to meet expectations. All in all, I believe Aegean airlines is a very honest and professional Airline that meets most of the expectations you can have for a trip!	1
London to Belfast City. A smooth journey with Aer Lingus both ways. Check-in and boarding expertly handled and swift. Both flights on time (on the way back we arrived ahead of schedule). Cabin crew were friendly, professional and nothing was too much. I have been travelling to and from Northern Ireland for nearly 25 years now and have never had a problem with Aer Lingus. Long may it continue.	1
In July we travelled home from Portugal after a 10 day trip in Albufeira. As I live in southern Sweden, our closest airport is Malmö Airport but it does not serve as many airlines and destinations as Copenhagen Airport, which is also close to us. Unfortunately there were to direct route from FAO to CPH, therefore we hade to make a stopover in Berlin-Tegel Airport. We flew with Air Berlin. The cabin staff were friendly and were always ready to help if anyone needed it, they even gave us recommendations for which food in the menu they thought was the best. AB offered drinks and snacks for free, on both of the flights. It was very nice, either you could pick a chocolate kex or some crisps. The seats were as comfortable as any other airline, I was sitting by an exit on our FAO–TXL flight and therefore I had some extra legroom. After landing, they offered some chocolate at the exit. Would definetley recommend and fly with Air Berlin again.	1
Munich to New York JFK via Dusseldorf on Air Berlin business class. Ground service helpful and friendly. On JFK flights, welcome drinks served during boarding (champagne, juice, etc). On-time departure. Very good food on outbound flight (DUS-JFK), worse on inbound (the catering from JFK is awful). Cabin staff charming and friendly. Business Class is the same as  Etihad Airways, and all seats have direct aisle access. Thank you for this very pleasant journey.	1
Athens to Amsterdam. Business class was a good value. Used the app to check in, pretty easy, selected seat whilst making the booking (1A). Fast track security was very fast (although Athens airport is very fast all the times). Went to their lounge, which was very nice, with a good selection of food and drinks. Priority boarding was efficient, warm towel was given 2 times (after take off and after meal). The service was excellent and the food delicious - a traditional Greek meal cooked in a modern way (grilled sea bream and spinach with rice with a touch of lemon). It looked like a young male flight attendand was being trained and the more senior staff were very helpful and supportive to him. Very cheerful and smiling throughout the flight. Pleasant flight and care for the passenger.	1
Flying with my family from Lax to EWR and than London with United. London to Athens with Aegean Airlines. So happy that we arrived in London and finally we had a flight with Aegean back to Athens. The flights with United was terrible, rude people from the check in at LAX until the and in London. Dear Aegean, you are really small if I compare you with United but you have to give some lessons to them, to tell them about service and “philoxenia”! Living in Samos Island and many times I’m flying Aegean and never disappointed! Hopefully in the future you can fly over the Atlantic too. You have the best aircraft service.	1
London to Larnaca via Athens. Excellent crew and value for money. One of the few airlines to serve free food/snacks and drinks in flight. My flight from Heathrow was delayed and I had a connection in Athens. Surprisingly, they have connection ambasadors (as Aegean calls them) which are waiting for once you arrive to guide you on your next flight (if both flights are operated by Aegean or Olympic). The seats were comfortable enough as well. I am a star alliance member too. I have flown many times with Aegean and they never let me down. Very pleased.	1
I would like to express my gratitude for some outstanding customer service I experienced from ground crew from Las Vegas to Vancouver. I am an 80 plus-year-old lady that was not looking forward to all of the walking and stress of going through customs when we reached Vancouver. I was blown away with the attentive ground staff that whisked me through customs and made it so enjoyable and so stress-free, thank you so much for your assistance. Happy Thanksgiving to you all.	1
Moscow to New York JFK. Just recently used Aeroflot and they exceeded my expectations. Good professionalism and appearance of crew members, good cleanliness. Inflight entertainment (great selection of movies, cartoons, games with remote) and my favorite is the food. 10 hr flight with 2 meals (appetizer, main course with 2 options, dessert), ice in between meals. Soft drinks offer a good selection, complimentary wine. We are talking about economy class, not many airlines offer you all that (for no extra charge). They provided headphones, blanket, pillow, eyesleep mask. If your flight is 1 hour (like from St. Petersburg to Moscow) to my surprise, what they called snack was a tasty sandwich, yogurt and chocolate bar, coffee, tea, juices.	1
Vancouver to Mérida via Mexico city. This was our first time flying Aeroméxico and can’t speak highly enough about the staff and service provided. The plane was very comfortable and the staff went above and beyond to make our trip pleasurable. Dori at the check in desk in Mérida was outstanding. Thank you so very much for taking such great care of us!	1
Dublin to Athens. It was a rather nice flight. It is the first time I flew Aegean. We did get a snack and drink on board. I will fly them again as the service was great and outstanding.	1
New York to Dusseldorf in Business Class with Air Berlin. Very pleasant experience. Seats, overall comfort, IFE quality of food and FA's were all very good. In my opinion the Air Berlin business class product is outstanding.	1
The new business class is outstanding. Service is top notch, so are the food and drink. The seats are comfortable and have a massage function included. The way they are placed gives you loads of privacy. Way better than Lufthansa, KLM etc.	1
We booked a round trip flight for our grandson to fly from Chelyabinsk to Washington DC. He was with his grandmother on the flight to America, and he returned home as an unaccompanied minor. Aeroflot was super in their booking, taking care of all the details, and his flight home to Chelyabinsk was seamless. He had a six hour layover in Moscow which he passed under Aeroflot control, and was escorted to the Chelyabinsk flight with no problems. His checked luggage was sent along to Moscow and then to Chelyabinsk without him having to touch it until arriving at Balindino in Chelyabinsk. He is pretty mature for a nine year old but still this was his first flight alone. We were very impressed with the care Areoflot took to make his flight safe and enjoyable. Thank you Aeroflot for making this trip memorable for our grandson and for his grateful grandparents.	1
We traveled economy class from Athens to Marseilles France on July 11, 2018. We were very impressed with Aegean, from ticketing, to boarding, to the food and drinks. We are United million milers, and were very pleased to have been able to check in in the Business Class line and for our luggage to be given priority. The flight attendants were super awesome, and not at all surly like American flight attendants. Very pleasant, nice cabin crew. They were very sweet to our kids as well. The food was delicious. But please Aegean, can’t you provide some entertainment? At least allow for free wi-fi for entertainment or even wi-fi for purchase.	1
I Would like to give the flight between Athens - Copenhagen on July 16 2018, 100 stars if I could. This is about My son who was on the flight yesterday. He is so scared of flying and suffers from claustrophobia and panic attacks. He was sending Me text messages when they were boarding telling Me That he is getting a panic attack and wants to get off the plane. I told him to talk to the flight attendents so That they can calm him down. And they did!  After he got off the plane on Copenhagen, he called Me. Telling Me about the fantastic service from all your flight attendants.They checked on him the whole flight. Gave him water, food etc. Made sure he was ok. Please let the flight attendants get this message. You were fantastic. Thank you so Much. My son Will only fly with Aegean airlines from now on. Best service ever!	1
I flew non-stop TXL-JFK on 13 March and I was extremely surprised about Air Berlin's new Business Class service. Let's not mention TXL airport though. The rotten airport (including the Air France Business Lounge gates and boarding area) is a disgrace which I will not blame Air Berlin for. However once I boarded the plane the service was so amazing - like in good old times. I got greeted by my name. Blankets slippers amenity kits are individually brought to you with a smile. The new flat seat feels more like a private cabin than a seat - much better than Lufthansa's new Business Class or AA's new one that I used recently too. The food and bar service was like in a restaurant - including a special dish of the day that was not on the menu. Last not least: The flight attendants were tremendously kind and attentive.	1
Cancun to Montreal. I had the most amazing flight with Air Canada Rouge yesterday, July 31st. It was smooth and very quick to arrive. One flight attendant in particular made my trip even more special. Giulia saw that I was crying (they were tears of gratitude) and while I was in the bathroom, left me a chocolate bar at my seat with a note saying “No matter what it is, life is good. Keep on smiling”. I have never received so much sympathy from a professional in this industry before. Definitely a touching detail I will never forget that brightened up my already great experience! Thank you Air Canada and Giulia!	1
Zurich to Heraklion return. Hats off to Aegean Airlines! My wife and I have been flying to Crete each summer for the last eight years. In the past we have flown with a Swiss charter air line. Which was a pain in the butt, for we had to travel when they did, not when we wanted! This time we went with Aegean Check in at Zurich was just outstanding, AAS did their best to move things along even with a long line, done in less than 20 minutes. This was a late night flight, It left on time, and the in flight service was one of the best that I have experienced in a long time. The only interesting comment I can make about the flight down, was the landing, let's just say it was a copilot landing. The best part of the trip was the return flight. Those of us who have traveled to Heraklion, know that the airport is a pit of pain and agony. I will address this issue, in a separate review,for things have changed. With Aegean they have there own separate check in counter, and a self check in, away from the madding charter craziness. Checkin was completed in 10 minutes! This was just fantastic! Where in the past it took hours! Ther was only a slight delay in takeoff due to weather/air traffic in Zurich, in flight service was outstanding again. After 14 years of long haul air travel for work, I have to give Aegean four stars in respect of outstanding service!	1
Mykonos to Athens. Check in smooth and easy - decided to print my boarding pass, as my mobile phone battery was dying. No paper on the e-check in machines, so had to use the desk, but this was quick and easy. Security in Mykonos airport was a breeze. Not enough seating on the gate. Aircraft arrived on time and was prepared for departure at a record time. Boarding was easy, both from the front and back - we just had to walk to it. Also quick and smooth. Full flight. They had asked some people to give their hand luggage for storage, so there was enough space on the cabin. Initially we were told that due to heavy traffic in Athens we'd have to wait 35', however better assignment was requested by the captain and we left just with 10' delay. Crew very professional. We were offered a greek local snack in this very short flight 25'). Landing on time. It was a pleasant flight.	1
DUS-TXL-DUS. Attitude of AB ground-staff in DUS remains problematic. They are grumpy and arrogant. Crew on board okay. Very punctual and swift performance. Price (396 euro RTN for 4) included snack drink chocolate and 23 kg luggage. The only problem with AB is reliability. They cancelled the last two flights out of Berlin so we had to leave almost three hours earlier. Had a similar experience last year. On the other hand: definitely preferred AB above Germanwings because of constant strike risk.	1
After reading quite a number of negative reviews I can not believe I actually flew Air Berlin. My flight from Zurich-Dusseldorf-Miami return in Business class was one of the most pleasurable flying experiences I have had. The planes were clean. The crews were efficient and kind. The food was plentiful and incredibly good. The seats are extremely comfortable. The entertainment is the best in the air. Overall Air Berlin is much better than KLM Air France British etc.	1
Flew in from Venice to Toronto on flight AC1907 on July 18th. Although we were in Economy, the staff/crew treated us exceptionally well. Courteous, pleasant and prompt service. Circulated and saw to our needs. Pleasant disposition and truly made us feel valued. Made the 9 hour flight a very positive experience. Thank you, crew of flight AC1907.	1
Poor expectations (prior reviews) were immediately erased from checking in to boarding the immense business cabin! We were greeted by a most professional crew and amazingly gregarious Austrian pilot! Since our arrival would be too early for VIE we were entertained by the pilot for 1 hour who introduced himself to all business class passengers. The cabin was spotless with the largest space that I have ever encountered! After the tight business seats for 18 hours last week (A350-900 flight on Singapore from EWR to SIN) this A330’s was delightful. My French wine was spot on and all meals were delicious. I look forward to booking Air China on my next Asia trips!	1
Flew Shanghai to Sydney. Wonderful customer service. Air China crew are outstanding, what a lovely experience. My favourite flight, next to Qantas. Highly recommended! Thank you for making our flight comfortable and relaxed - you’re delightfully charming.	1
Manchester to Toronto. Cannot say anything negative about this flight. Travelled with trepidation after reading the reviews. The flight crew were 100 per cent attentive, kept us well hydrated. Aircraft was clean and comfortable. Seats were comfortable, food was good. Would not hesitate to fly with them again	1
Had a very pleasant and punctual 9-hour Aeroflot flight from Vladivostok to Moscow. Nothing to complain about: plane was very new, personnel was friendly, and the two hot meals (ordered vegetarian) were surprisingly good. Entertainment system modern and working, movies were also available in English (although this was a domestic flight). Of course there could be more space between seats in Economy, but that's how it is today with almost every airline on the globe. Ticket price for this 4000-mile-journey was almost ridiculously low (not even 200 EUR).	1
We had a a great experience flying with Aeromexico from London to Mexico City and back. Both flights were on time or arrived earlier and  the staff were extremely friendly and professional! The food was also on overall good level  we had some chicken curry, chicken with spinach and corn on and Mexican style breakfast on both flights). The tequila open bar was also great and we had some good tequila on both flights. Check in process and boarding process is also efficient and fast (except for the check in for one of our flights not working on their website so we contacted customer care and it was solved). We found everything to be of good standard and most importantly no delays or cancellation. In contrast, our flights with another airline (approximately 3 hours) got delayed by an hour each.	1
Hamburg to Athens. Aegean Airline is one of the best airlines in Europe. The staff is very friendly and helps, if you have any questions or problems. The airplane was clean and in a very good condition. The food in the Business Class was very tasty. The variety of drinks is also very good. Everyone, who fly to Greece, must try Aegean Airlines!	1
I was one of the thousands stranded by WOW airlines abroad. A lot of articles suggested Icelandair had you open a case, send all your personal information to prove you had paid already & told you to call to get a discounted rate as a rescue fair (the fair provided to me would have caused me to miss my flight within the states back home and been more than I could purchased for a normal flight on the open market through other carriers). I called Aer Lingus and asked if they were giving discounted rates, they where sympathetic, got me on a flight and gave me a discount with out jumping through hoops. They really were there for the stranded passengers abroad.  I had a very comfortable flight from Dublin to Newark. I highly recommend this carrier!	1
Montreal to Pointe a Pitre. Great flight. Had a disruptive passenger who created a scene over his carry on bag. The stewards were 100% professional in dealing with him and too be honest they were too nice. The return was just as good. A big thank you to air steward Codey	1
Moscow to Kaliningrad with Aeroflot. Excellent value for money and quality. Fast check-in, very courteous staff, no queues. Cabin crew at the highest level for a short trip, with very tasty inflight catering. Clean interior, a sufficiently large distance between the rows. New modern aircraft and one the most important is that the departure and arrival were in time.	1
Flying with Aeroflot was wonderful. Ironically, my flight from Delhi to New York via Moscow did not start out well, as it was cancelled because of a snow storm in New York. This was not the fault of the airline. The Aeroflot ground crew in Delhi was on top of things. They put me up in a very nice hotel with meals, plus transportation to and from the hotel.  The following day the flight left on time to Moscow. It was comfortable and the connecting flight from Moscow to New York was exceptional. The service was excellent, and the food was really tasty. Top marks for Aeroflot. They made what could have been a difficult time (because of the weather) very comfortable.	1
Aguascalientes to Mexico City. I got a free upgrade to Clase Premier along with my travel companion. It was a nice short flight, the flight attendants were attentive and called us by our names. On time departure and arrival, Sky Priority and a snack with beer.	1
Mexico City to Aguascalientes. The flight attendant’s service was very positive and service oriented. Captain explained to us the route, as well as he would make interesting remarks while flying somewhere particularly interesting. Free snacks and beverages were served. Seats were comfortable, good space 2x2 seat configuration. No TV screens as this is a regional aircraft, but it was a very short flight.  Arrived 15 minutes before schedule and fast arriving bag.	1
Rome to Thessaloniki via Athens. A very good experience! The handling was nice. We had only a delay because of bad weather condition in Rome. The cabin crew was very polite and helpful. The food was nice, any snack and drink was made by top brands. I would definitely recommend to fly with Aegean Airlines.	1
Düsseldorf to Dublin. Boarding started on time and the plane started on time. The whole staff was friendly offered help and was in a good mood. The tea was good. Seats are modern and the legroom is above average. The whole flight was enjoyable.	1
Manchester to Los Angeles via Dublin with Aer Lingus. I took ill on the return flight from LA to Dublin. The air stewards had been most attentive and friendly all flight but when I became ill, they were absolutely fantastic. I cant praise them enough. Also the paramedics at Dublin airport.	1
JFK-DUS DUS-ZRH TXL-MUC MUC-DUS DUS-JFK. From reading all these reviews before my trip I was a bit nervous but actually my trip turned out awesome! I took five Air Berlin flights on my 3 week vacation and not one of them was an issue. Even my bag arrived with me! All flights were on time served pretty decent food and the flight attendants were friendly. We got served chicken or pasta on the long haul flight and croissants or chips on the short haul. The legroom especially on the A330-200 was tight even for a 5' 3" person like me but it was a manageable. If you're tall you might have a problem. Each seat on the A330 is equipped with a personal inflight entertainment with a good selection of games and movies. When you select a seat on the A330 choose an even number because you'll have a full window instead of sitting between two halves of one. My only problem was the boarding process. Too many people were pushing and shoving when their group is called and the airline changed a gate in MUC without notifying us. Overall my experience was good much better than an US airline. I would definitely fly Air Berlin again!	1
Los Angeles to Bombay via Beijing. Other airlines charged $1200 on for a return ticket but Air China which sold its ticket for $850. LAX to PEK was a 13 hours flight, I was able to check-in online. The flight departed 30 minutes late but reached PEK on time and was able to catch my next flight easily. (layover at PEK was just 1.5 hours) After takeoff, the drinks and food service started. I had ordered a special meal (Hindu Veg). The food tasted good and surpassed my expectation. The in-flight entertainment had a good collection of Hollywood movies. I found flight attendants super friendly and genuinely caring. T Personally, I feel language is just a medium of communication, and I was able to communicate easily with them. I received all my bags in BOM safe and without damage.  Overall I am really pleased with my experience in economy class.	1
Los Angeles to Ho Chi Minh City via Beijing. There was a line for Star Alliance Gold member and First and Business class My seat 41D space is big enough. Out of gate on time 11:30am Entertainment adequate with 76 Hollywood movies, including 21 new released.  Transfer information is available just 40 minutes before landing. This is a very helpful feature that CA providing to passengers. The 10 inches passenger monitor function well. Food service was fantastic and it was served after 1.5 hours on the air. First meal: beef with rice or pork with rice. Beverages: adequate with many kinds of juice. The beer was served on Air China is Yan Jing Beer 燕京啤酒。 After first meal there was Haagen Das ice cream, my favorite brand. I took a photo, the female attendant said “do not take photo” but I was taking it any way. I just want to show the world their good service. Staff are so helpful. They help passengers with the hand carry on which I don’t see much on United flights. (I am United Gold member). Onboard temperature: good control.	1
Boston to Mexico City. Crew attentive and professional. Good food and drinks. Loyalty to Club Premier paid off and we got an upgrade to Business Class. Good in-flight entertainment and WiFi. Very new and well maintained plane. Good seats. The baby crib service was amazing as our baby was able to fully rest before our arrival. The flight arrived early to Mexico City. Baggage came out quite fast. In general it was an excellent flight. Aeromexico ground personnel in Boston friendly and patient with us and kids during baggage drop/check-in process.	1
Mexico City to Boston. A very nice and quite new airplane with Boeing Sky interior, different lighting schemes that help you relax. The food was good, (free full meal including beer and spirits). AM Plus (Premium economy) was quite nice and spacious. The overhead bins had a different configuration that made the cabin more spacious too. The flight crew were quite attentive and came offering different services during the flight (meals, duty free sale, drinks and water). Used WiFi for almost three hours and allowed me to work and stay in touch with the ground. We were traveling with a baby and AeroMexico offers a baby bassinet service.	1
London Heathrow to Bangkok via Moscow return with Aeroflot, and I have nothing but positive comments. Four flights in all, staff friendly, comfortable seats, food was quite good, good luggage allowance, no hidden extras, free drinks, lots of entertainment on long haul. Plane on return long haul journey was only 1/3 full, and told we could use spare seats to sleep. 3 out of four flights landed early, delayed on one due to passenger being told they could not fly so they had to get luggage off!	1
My colleague and I decided to fly on Aeroflot in spite of protests from our friends, saying we should fly on an American airline, but we are the type who like to take opportunities to try anything! My colleague is 68 and I'm 75 and we both are profoundly Deaf, using American Sign language (ASL). We are so glad that we flew on Aeroflot for everything had been just great. A great flight, good food, enlightening entertainment (in form of foreign films with subtitles) and above all, the flight crew was just awesome for they had made communication very easily accessible and that they had given us their attention when it was appropriate. They treated us as deaf people with dignity which in turn making us very human! Not only that, but we were properly treated to the custom area with class and ease upon our landing in Moscow. The very same things had taken happen on flights to Munich and back to Moscow and then on way home to Los Angeles. Actually flying on Aeroflot was on my bucket list and I made it and it was worth every mile! In the future, I'll definitely fly on Aeroflot whenever it takes me to!  Thank you for giving us the opportunity to fly with you. I'll vote it as the best international airline!	1
Guadalajara to Mexico City. High-quality service by professional and attentive staff. Free snacks and drinks (including alcoholic beverages) were served. Personal in-flight entertainment screen in all seats and USB port. Good in-flight magazine and  WiFi on board. Flight connection and luggage delivery information given immediately after landing in Mexico City and while taxing to gate.	1
Mexico City to Guadalajara. Used web check-in services, got my mobile boarding pass. Used the Sky Priority line in Mexico City’s T2 security checkpoint. Sky Priority and zone boarding was done perfectly. Bin space was good, the crew extremely friendly and professional service-oriented. On time departure and early arrival. In-flight entertainment with individual tv screens and also good wi-fi (I started my writing my review with Aeromexico’s GoGo in-flight WiFi!). I am a frequent flyer and enjoy using AeroMexico very much, I find it of high standards and very reliable.	1
Houston to Mexico City. This was the second leg of my trip from Houston to Mexico City. An hour prior to boarding the gate agent called me to inform me my connecting luggage was ready to be put on the plane and I could pick it up once I arrived in Mexico City. This flight was operated by AeroMexico Connect on an Embraer 190. Once we started boarding it was done from zone one through three. Newspapers and candy were available on the jet bridge in both English and Spanish and flight attendants smiled and welcomed us onboard. About an hour into this short two hour flight snack boxes containing a mini croissant, two slices of cheese, apple sauce and a chocolate were handed out in economy class. Alcohol was available I ordered tequila and orange juice. Afterwards I was given a beer and we landed in Mexico City on time. Service was great what makes it better flying a Mexican carrier is having a latin crew as well as not having to pay for alcohol or food. Would recommend this airline.	1
Athens to Dusseldorf. I travel frequently with Aegean and this flight was really nice. The cabin crew was really friendly and helpful. The whole flight from Athens to Dusseldorf was really flawless. The landing was perfect. We didn't even understand that we had landed (there was not even a short tremble when the wheels touched the ρθνςαυ). I definitely recommend Aegean Airlines.	1
Larnaca to London via Athens. They have wonderful cabin staff and are helpful, there with a smile. The food on board is very good as is the service, even though my flight stops over in Athens rather than direct, its still enjoyable. Only problem I had was first time at ATthens, when you are in transit its not clear where to go when you enter the airport . Apart from that can't fault anything keep up the good work.	1
Dublin to Gatwick was quick and efficient. I arrived at Dublin airport and put my bag on the scales / bag-drop. I needed to check-in my baggage. This was a simple self-service process. I then made my way to the bar and waited to board. The flight was busy the seat 1F was fine. A little tight but good for economy class. The staff were good and I had a nice guinness pie for the short flight. We arrived in London on time. The baggage didn't take too long to collect and I made my way to the train which was quick and only two stops into Clapham Junction. Overall a quick and easy way to London and less busy than Heathrow.	1
Flew Dusseldorf to Faro Portugal. Check-in in Dusseldorf was really nice got seats in row 9 with window. Check-in staff nice and polite and helpful. Plane boarding was quick and not a hassle and on time. Take off just 10 minutes late due to emergency landing of a 4U plane. Service on board was great very nice crew. Service with the Sansibar-Snack was nice we got a Currywurst with roll and two nice bottle of Pommery champagne for a little extra but it was nice to have that. Free movie shown on overhead screens and a lot of legroom. Cockpit crew provided us with nice information. We got jetbridge at Faro so deplaning was nice and smooth again. Baggage was on time on the belt. So this is a great airline.	1
London to Athens. Excellent experience, boarding was efficient and organized, clean aircraft with welcoming friendly crew. After take off, drinks served, cleared, hot meal served in economy (simple but good, hot pasta, eggplant salad, warm bread with cheese and butter, cookie) coffee and tea trolley passed twice. Flight landed 45 minutes early, priority bags came off first 15 minutes after landing. Impressive experience.	1
Dublin to Boston. I had a very stressful experience as when I got up to the counter to check in the lady informed me that my esta had been deleted by the American embassy. I was already running late so the lady told me to go to the side and get a new esta. I was so panicked as I really didn’t have the money to book a later flight and then the supervisor came over I can’t remember her name and I explained my situation and she could see how upset and worried I was so she called a girl over to help me. The lady who came over to help me had the patience of a saint she practically did the whole esta for me she couldn’t be more helpful! We finally got my esta done and the supervisor brought me through fast track so I made my flight. I can’t thank the Aer Lingus staff enough on how helpful they were with me really really nice people.	1
Flew from Muenster Osnabrueck to Corfu 2nd August and returned 6th September 2014. As we had our dog and dog box we found the service by Air Berlin staff at both airports very helpful and my family are grateful for this service. We travel every year to Corfu for a long summer holiday and certainly shall use Air Berlin again.	1
8th Aug 2014 London Stansted to Dusseldorf AB5825 and then 9th Aug Dusseldorf to Cancun AB7416 and return 23rd Aug Cancun to Dusseldorf AB7417 and Dusseldorf to London Stansted AB5826. Really good long haul cross Atlantic flights kind and helpful at staff check-in and for in-flight service. Good meals with drinks brought round in between. Planes seemed new with fresh seating and USB ports on the media screens. The short haul Stansted to Dusseldorf parts were delivered by Etihad Regional and again good in-flight service. The only slight negative was the time to check in on return they opened it 1.5 hours pre flight and completed 45 mins before the flight with only about 30 people in line the slowest check per person I've ever known. However Dusseldorf airport was lovely and smart for the wait time between flights. Avoided US Immigration hassles/poor customer service by flying Germany to Mexico.	1
Los Angeles to Barcelona via Moscow with Aeroflot. We are a family of six, our youngest is 10, I was worried about so many things, including the fact that you can't choose your seat until 24 hours before the flight. We had the best flights ever! We loved Aeroflot, the seats, food and entertainment, everything was excellent. We have flown Delta in the past to Germany, and Aeroflot was so much better. Movies were new, good shows, many options. Russian people aren't very smiley, good thing I didn't need a friend on flight, just someone to bring food and drinks! The only minor gripe, they served the drinks warm, no ice, and only a little water, definitely buy a water before you board the plane.	1
Flew to Beirut from Sofia via Athens. All I can say that I was impressed by what this airline offers. Amazing and professional cabin staff, both flights were pleasant and everything was on point. The food they served was also much better than others can serve during flight. I won’t hesitate flying with Aegean again. I love this airline!	1
Athens to Vienna. Punctual take-off and landing, nice and friendly cabin Crew, even the meal was fine. Very low price ticket, still high quality Service, I do not like the branding of the airline.	1
Very comfortable leather seat. Quick boarding at TXL. They gave snacks and drinks during the flight from TXL to VCE. Very polite and friendly crew.	1
We flew Economy with Air Berlin as it was the only carrier that offered a flight from Naples to Stockholm at a good price and we were pleasantly surprised with the whole experience after reading quite a few negative comments in this forum. There was a 3 hour stopover at Berlin Tegel which wasn't great but no issues whatsoever with Air Berlin. Both flights left on time aircraft was newish and clean service was pleasant despite a fully loaded plane and they also threw in coffee and a sandwich. No inflight entertainment but hey on a 2 hour flight who needs it? We were very happy with what was delivered for the price (Italy to Sweden for just $200) and I wouldn't hesitate to use them again.	1
We were due to fly from Edmonton to Las Vegas and our flight was cancelled due to bad weather in Vegas. The airline was very nice to put us up in a hotel in Edmonton for the night, give us $20 of food passes for the airport and $40 food passes for the hotel for supper. It was not their fault that the weather in Las Vegas was poor so we appreciated what they did for us even though we felt they did not have to! We also received a $200 credit each so a total of $400 towards our next flights booked with them! How amazing we were very shocked to receive the email while in Vegas about the credit. I don’t normally have time to write reviews but I had to for this and feel Air Canada went out of their way to make us feel a little less sad that we had to stay one day of our vacation in Edmonton rather than Vegas! Thank your Air Canada you really went over and above!	1
First time with Aeroflot. Short two hour flights Moscow to Astrakhan and back. Great on time flights, modern and clean aircraft, nice cabin crew, professional and polite. Aeroflot uniform definitely among the most stylish cabin crew uniforms. All in all, really great job.	1
Istanbul to Hong Kong via Moscow. The Aeroflot flight from Istanbul was delayed a few hours, and would have appreciated some information about this delay. However Aeroflot staff were outstanding at helping us to transfer to our Moscow to Hong Kong leg. Flew business class and had to be amongst the best. Great flat bed and excellent cabin service. Food well presented and of a good quality. They even provided fresh flowers and white linen tablecloth with Bollinger champagne. The wine list was outstanding. Would definitely recommend Aeroflot especially business class which is excellent value for money.	1
I flew Aegean Airlines from Athens to Stockholm Arlanda in December. The flight was full, so the ground staff asked us kindly if we'd like to check our luggage for free. Onboard, the plane was clean and modern. We were served a full breakfast, and the flight attendants came around a lot with rounds of drinks. I really like Aegean cabin crew because they are very kind, polite and helpful. We arrived in Stockholm 30 minutes earlier, where we collected our luggage from the carousel. The only thing I'd like to mention is that most of the time Aegean does not use the jetbridges in Athens airport, even when they are available, and the passengers have to go to the plane by bus. Overall an excellent experience and for me is the best carrier in Europe.	1
Dusseldorf to Madrid. Air Berlin is a very nice airline. They gave everyone a complementary sandwich and a drink. Entertainment was okay just a little hard if you are a bit far from the dropdown screen. Staff very helpful.	1
Aeroflot from Los Angeles to Moscow, and a really amazing business class service, the best I have had. The flight attendants served food that was restaurant quality. Dinner was served with a rose and there were a lot of little extras. They had excellent toiletries in the bathrooms, and offered slippers in business class. They had as many English language movies and TV shows on a Russian airline as I would have found on an American one. The seats are fairly standard for international business class, I have seen the same model on El Al and almost the same model on American Airlines.	1
I have never left a review before, but after our flight from New York to Moscow with Aeroflot I wanted to. The service we received is so much better than in the US. I am flying alone with a baby in my arms (age 1.5 years). We were provided with a cot onboard and baby food, and during the flight baby I rested and staff were super. So much attention and care from Aeroflot staff. Thank you. I will always fly Aeroflot.	1
London to Mexico City return. Excellent flight, marvelous staff and great value for money. Both flights were fantastic: on time, easy check-in and check-out, the staff was helpful and friendly, comfortable seats, clean plane overall. I was pleasently surprised by the food quality. I ordered a vegetarian meal and got 2 delicious meals that consisted of a fruit plate, salad with dressing, bread and a main curse that changed: curry rice with broccoli, roasted vegetables with a promodoro sauce, vegetable stir fry and chilaquiles with beans.	1
Flew FRA-TXL-SZG. Excellent Airline. Food was good. Helps so much to have a few screens to look at during a flight. The staff were so kind. The funny thing I noticed was they advertise more for Etihad than they do for themselves. Would definitely fly them again.	1
Flew from Stockholm to Athens on Aegean Airlines. Had only cabin baggage so I went straight to the gate. The airplane was at the gate on time, but the boarding was a mess, ending up having a 20 min delay. The cabin was clean and modern. The crew was excellent, carrying out lots of rounds of services. The hot meal was nice and delicious. They also offered 3 rounds of drinks. The captain kept keeping us informed about the flight. Arrived in Athens with a 20 min delay. The only thing I would recommend is to install some sort of IFE apart from the overhead screens. I've flown Aegean a lot of times, and I would certainly choose them again.	1
I had a great trip with Aeroflot. Great food, new and clean airplanes, and friendly, helpful crew. Flights were comfortable and on time. They had a great selection of entertainment - lots of English options too.	1
The flight was OK and comfortable. The price was the best on the market and the service was amazing. The planes were clean and new and all of my flights were without any troubles. I would like to say thanks to Aeroflot and its staff.	1
Flight Amsterdam - Acapulco via Mexico City in economy class. Flight to Mexico City on brand new Boeing 787-9. Seats in economy were good, decent width and leg room. Also inflight entertainment made a good impression on me. Touchscreens were responsive, quite big and provided good quality. Choice of movies, definitely not as large as on Emirates but still sufficient, even for a long 12 hour flight. Service during the whole flight was very good, cabin crew were kind and attentive. Connecting flight to Acapulco on Embraer 190, which is my favourite regional jet. Seats on this airplane are really comfortable. I really enjoyed flying Aeromexico! Excellent price-value ratio!	1
Athens to Larnaca. I did not have any baggage problem at all. Everyone has to download the Aegean app and make a miles and bonus account for special offers and upgrades! You can have all the information about your flight (gate,time etc) and your boarding pass in your hand. On the airplane now, cabin crew was kind and friendly, we departed on time from ATH. The food delicious and my seat very comfortable (7A).	1
Amazing. One of my best trips from Berlin to Athens. Very friendly cabin crew. Nice, modern and clean cabin. The food was delicious. On time arrival and departure. I was curious about the P.A (pilot announcement) if they will inform us about the flight and so they did 3 times. Before take-off at cruising altitude and before landing. I am going to fly again and again with them.	1
Great experience from Krakow to Athens. Having flown mostly low-cost airlines, it was a great change to fly with Aegean. Despite the low ticket price the service was better than other major airlines I have flown with. Seats were comfortable, food was nice (had vegetarian option) and there were lots of drinks available. The cabin crew was really nice and helpful. Despite a slight delay with the departure, we landed on time in Athens. The only thing that was a bit annoying was that the queue for bag drop for people with printed boarding passes took longer than the one for people without them (I thought it was quite unusual) and I had to rush to the gate after checking my luggage. But all in all, amazing experience, would definitely recommend.	1
Flew Aegean Airlines from Bucharest to Toulouse via Athens. This is the second time in a few months that I have had superb value for money from this airline. All flights were on time - in yesterday's case, half an hour early. This airline must be one of the few in Europe which still gives you something decent to eat and a glass of wine in the afternoon. The cabin crew were friendly and attentive. However, what really impressed me was the space between seats. All flights have been a very comfortable experience and excellent value for money.	1
Flew Cologne-Berlin/TXL return. Modern aircraft both flights with Boeing 737-700 one brand new with Dreamliner interior very nice. Good service from flight crew got 2 drinks and offered sweet or salty snack. Crew was nice and smiling. Pilot informed during flight and arrived on time in Berlin. Baggage was quick on belt. TXL is an old airport and that is not to blame Air Berlin for that. Return flight was nice as well crew gave me a 3rd hot drink that was a nice touch. Plane was not full and the service was nice and with a smile. Much better than Germanwings. I wish Air Berlin would fly CGN-HAM.	1
The flight was pleasant. Boarding was in order with Mandarin and English. Waiting area was clean and spacious. Plane interior clean and comfortable. Spacious seat for average size persons. Flight attendants are helpful.  Food was good and adequate. Touched down to LAX was the perfect. I see no problem with AQir China and will take this airline again if the price is right. This ticket was 20% cheaper than other airlines.	1
We flew from Toronto, Canada (YYZ) to Providenciales, Turks and Caicos (BPV) for vacation. Everything was amazing the crew was easily 5 stars, we met one of the flight attendants at the gate and saw our kids looking at all the planes, she offered them to sit in the cockpit once we made it to our destination. The kids enjoyed the flight. The flight came with complimentary drinks, the food did cost extra we didn't purchase but other passengers were saying it was well worth it. The IFE had lots of options and the WIFI was very fast. The pilots made a very soft landing we deboarded in 5 minutes, we did deboard last because the pilots let the kids stay in the cockpit for a bit, they learned so much! Overall definitely fly with Air Canada had a great experience.	1
Really an excellent new premium economy product. Almost as wide a seat as business class without the full recline. I have an allergy problem and they ran out of the meal option in premium economy that I could eat, so the attendants gave me a meal from business class. The service in premium economy was really what I would have expected in business class, constantly serving drinks and providing service. Amazing value for the money. Brand new in-flight entertainment system on the B777-300ER, same day / night destination time zone synchronization lighting (i.e. blue during the day time at destination) as is found on the new Boeing 787. Bath rooms had extra amenities, wet wipes, deodorants, and hand towels. Beyond my expectations for Premium Economy (which they reffer to as comfort class).	1
Mexico City to London. This was our fourth flight with Aeromexico in the last two weeks. Flying from London to Mexico City. Then to Huatulco. Then Oaxaca to Mexico City. And finally back to London. I can say that this is now probably one of my favourite airlines having travelled around the world for many years on many airlines. Friendly staff. Helpful. Very comfortable seats. Slept more on these planes than others. Great food and drink. Easy check in on their website or at airport. Good prices. Would recommend them as an airline. Surprised as their reviews are not so good so wasn't expecting much. But so happy to have used them. Best thing was the wonderful Tequila after their meals. It was an amazing taste. Great films.	1
Athens to Helsinki. I've travelled with Aegean Airlines many times in the past few years. I decided to finally write a review, seeing the consistency of service - a single positive or negative experience can be attributed to chance, but I think safer conclusions can be drawn after having the same experience time after time after time. And my experience of Aegean Airlines has always been stellar. The plane was clean, in good condition (this time I flew with one of their new A320ceo - those with "sharklets" at the wing tips), inspiring reliability. The crew were friendly in a genuine way - it's amazing how easy it is to spot fake smiles - and gave the impression they truly care for the passengers. Leg room must be among the best, I've never felt squeezed in an Aegean plane. In-flight service is miles ahead of anyone else. You get a warm meal with drinks (including alcoholic ones, such as wine or beer), coffee/tea, before-take-off candy, and there were even gifts for children.  I'm baffled by some people who claim Aegean's in-flight entertainment is lacking, and I applaud Aegean's decision to show instead a truly beautiful video displaying the many places worth visiting in Greece. Flight-deck crew provide information to the passengers along the way.  All in all, it's hard to find any flaws. If I absolutely had to pick something, I'd say that sometimes the aisle seems a bit clogged - probably as a result of the cabin crew being busy serving passengers. I think Aegean fully deserves its "best regional airline" designation, as you get a lot of value for your money. Their prices are more than reasonable, and when you realize how much you get for what you pay, the result is totally worth it. No chance I'd fly with anyone else on my way to/from Greece	1
Excellent service and after support. My car seat was missing, they refunded the amount. I had issues with my flight in Toronto and they have returned hotel and other expenses. Keep up the good work.	1
Mykonos to London via Athens. This was my first time flying with Aegean. My ticket said that the first sector would be operated by Olympic Air but that was not the case - it was on an Aegean aircraft. The first sector from JMK-ATH was very short (less than 30 minutes in the air) but the crew offered sweets before take off, then a hand wipe and a small snack. The transfer in ATH was only 40 minutes but there were "transfer ambassadors" to make this process go smoothly. The second sector from ATH-LHR was very busy but the service (from the immaculately groomed crew) was first class. There was an initial beverage service, followed by a meal/beverage service followed by hot drinks, the crew were working really hard and provided such a great service. Aegean provides a premium airline experience that is becoming hard to find in the European short-haul market.	1
Nurnberg to Thessaloniki. I almost solely fly Aegean Airlines because they offer Ryanair prices with a Lufthansa comfort and service. On medium haul flights they offer a complementary warm meal, unlike most European airlines. On short haul flights, they offer a snack and and a drink and a coffee. I´d like to add, that I once had my flight anulled due to bad weather, and they offered me a free 5* hotel stay, considering European law does not oblige airlines to offer such things due to bad weather. For me Aegean is Europe's best airline.	1
Vancouver to Osaka. We found this flight comfortable and the crew provided good service. It seems that many people are aggravated by the lack of screens on the back of seats, to provide distraction in flight. We never pay attention to those anyhow, except to track the plane's location. The food was good. The seats were good because recline was quite limited and so the people in front of us did not push back into our space. We got two meals which were palatable. Seating is 2xx2 so we did not have to climb over anyone to get to the aisle. I'd be happy to travel on this aircraft with this airline again.	1
Thessaloniki to Munich. Excellent trip, on time and very good service. Business class is spacious, service friendly and thoughtful. Priority boarding and priority transfer from plane to terminal much appreciated. Good information on board, experienced pilots, smooth landing. Overall a very pleasant experience.	1
Flew LHR to SVO 27/3/15 returned 4/4/15. Outbound A321 return A330-300. Both trips were comfortable with cabin crew all very helpful and pleasant to a non Russian Speaker. We were in economy both ways. The plane was clean the toilets were fine and the food and drinks provided were good for airline food in our family experience. Overall a very pleasant experience No IFE on way out as small plane but lots on way back choice was good.	1
I was extremely satisfied with the flight. The cabin crews are friendly, and frequent water runs over night without asking. Food is not the best but definitely edible, no menu provided. Clean airport, frequent cleaning of toilets and even happy to chat to passengers for the overnight flight in the galley. Aircraft new, seat is normal size for economy class. All flights on time, impressive considering the congestion in Beijing airport. Very satisfied and I will definitely come back.	1
I had a standby ticket for the flight Heraklion to Zurich and onward to final destination Frankfurt with another company. The connecting flight however was 55 minutes after arrival at Zurich. I would like to thank your ticketing/check-in staff to finding the perfect solution for me. I am very impressed by your team and will recommend Aegean Airlines to everyone. Hope to see you again soon.	1
Bucharest to Heraklion via Athens. Superb flight. First when we did the check in the person let us 2 baggages even if we didn't pay for them extra fee so it will be easier for us in the plane. They had great food on board and taking in consideration that we traveled with a 1 year and 2 months baby they gave us extra care. Great Company and I highly recommend it.	1
Aegean is definitely one of the best airlines in Europe - no surprise they keep winning awards. Top level service, excellent food on board, amazingly friendly staff, flights leave and arrive on time, they fly to the best airports (for example, London Heathrow instead of other lower-cost London airports) and they always park at the most convenient gate. Top choice for flying in Europe.	1
Just wanted to give a big warm shoutout to Diana, an amazing flight attendant on the Toronto To Prague flight on Aug 24 (Flight AC1923). She was so personable and helpful during the flight. I watched as she handled many tired and fussy passengers with ease and grace. Diana smiled from the moment we boarded to the minute we landed.	1
Las Vegas to Mexico City. I bought a ticket with prepaid luggage. When I was making web check in the system tried to make me pay again. So we had to make it at the airport. Travelling with senior citizens and staff were very accomodating. FA were nice. The flight included a lunch service. Flight arrive on time.	1
Another high quality experience with Aegean flying from Athens to Berlin. All staff were polite and highly professional, and free hot meals and alcoholic beverages were offered. A thunderstorm in Berlin required a diversion to Leipzig airport for several hours, followed by storm-related problems disembarking at TXL - all handled by the staff calmly, courteously, and with frequent updates - free refreshments were also available during the delay. Some sort of inflight entertainment would have been appreciated. Would be very interested in seeing this airline provide long-haul service.	1
Mytilene to London Heathrow via Athens return. As always, a pleasure to fly with Aegean. Cabin crew were very friendly, efficient and professional, plane was clean. Food was ok, it's not 5 star fine dining but much appreciated even on a 3.5 - 4 hr flight. Lovely wine. Landed early in ATH as is nearly always the case. ATH - MJT was a full flight and about 35 mins in the air with a drinks service followed by a breakfast snack service followed by coffee tea service (those cabin crew were constantly on the move and smiling). One thing that I'm not keen on is the pre allocated seating which is a pain especially if you want a specific seat (extra leg room, I'm 6' 6"). From LHR to ATH I logged on for check in as soon as it opened and there were only approx 13 other seats to select and from ATH to LHR approx 18 seats. Fortunately got an extra legroom seat on outbound but inbound had to ask an agent at the airport if a seat had become available. After a bit of tapping away she gave me extra legroom seats on both inbound flights (very appreciated). Please can we go back to selecting our own seats? Boarding is the usual chaos with no one taking any notice of the announcements (if they're boarding passengers seated at the back you can bet those with seats at the front will go through too) but it's no big deal and in no way reflects on the airline. Will definitely continue using Aegean when flying to Greece though	1
Flew Zurich to Rhodes. I have never been disappointed by Aegean. Online check-in process is straight-forward, with just a few clicks whereas with several other airlines you have to go through more steps. The plane was delayed for 15 min because of traffic in Zurich but the captain and the crew were updating passengers constantly. Leg space was more than average. Food was good for such a short (and inexpensive) flight. But what makes the big difference in every flight is the crew. They go beyond the formal politeness of crew members and do not hesitate to show more of their human side. It is nice to see how they speak spontaneously to the passengers, make jokes, and are very caring and enthusiastic with children. Please, keep doing the great work and you will always have your loyal passengers.	1
I wanted to give a shout out to the Air Canada staff working the counter in St, Johns NL on March 3 2023 at 5 am. Myself and my wife got held up in Security that morning going on a family vacation to Orlando. Long story short we missed our flight because of the delay and the staff at Air Canada were so great they got us on the next flight to Toronto to catch up with the rest of the family in Toronto. All my years of flying the service and attitude of Air Canada staff was so Fantastic and bent over backwards to help us. A special Thank You to you all at the check in counter and at the gate - will definitely be flying our next trip with Air Canada.	1
I have an upcoming flight. I made a mistake in entering my wife’s maiden name instead of her married, legal name. Air Canada was extremely clear, helpful, and responsive in resolving this issue. This started with their actually promptly answering the phone. I’ve been on hold with Aer Lingus for over 100 minutes, but was on hold with Air Canada for 30 seconds. This makes a difference. And the person who answered was very easy to understand and articulate - a native English speaker. I was anxious about the problem and asked a number of questions, on the phone and by email. In every case they responded quickly and clearly, making the resolution happen. I just needed a marriage certificate. They assured me they could resolve it promptly and when I did send the certificate it was resolved in a few hours. I’ve had very different experiences, say with Spirit Airlines. Not sure if it is resolved with them or not.	1
I flew from Copenhagen to Tokyo with a stop-over en Moscow SVO. It was a very positive experience. Aeroflot has gone through a large modernization programme in the recent years and it was very evident when I travelled with them. Most of their fleet now consists of modern airliners such as the A320 the A330 and the Boeing 777. I flew on their A320 from CPH to SVO. For a short-haul flight the onboard service was extremely good compared to most European airlines. The food consisted of fresh bread cheese beef and a delicious cake and the cabin crew were serving cold and hot drinks throughout the whole flight. The crew was extremely friendly. Since the plane was only half full many of the passengers were lying down across the seats. The cabin crew immediately offered them blankets and pillows to make them more comfortable. This is the first time I have experienced this on a European flight. The transfer at SVO was smooth and easy. The airport has been renovated and now offers an easy access between the terminals without having to go outside the airport. The passport and security check took less than 10 minutes much to my surprise and I was now standing in Terminal D which had a wide selection of restaurants shops as well as free WiFi. The flight to Tokyo was on an A330. The interior felt fresh and new and the seats were very comfortable although for a tall guy such as myself the legroom left much to be desired but that is not the fault of the airline. The cabin crew on this flight were fluent in English and Japanese. Again very friendly people. There was a passenger in front of me who seemed rather anxious about flying and kept calling the crew throughout the whole flight. They never ignored his calls or talked bad to him. They kept smiling and did what they could to make him feel comfortable. The food was again very tasty and the menu offered both Russian and Japanese dishes and despite the rather cramped space I had a very comfortable flight to Tokyo. I have read many negative reviews about Aeroflot and I will not deny that people might have had some bad experiences but my opinion on Aeroflot is that it is a modern airline that offers some of the cheapest tickets in the world while maintaining a high standard in customer service. I have already booked my next flight with Aeroflot and I will continue to fly with them whenever possible.	1
Again, a very nice experience with Aegean Airlines. I was flying from Warsaw to Santorini via Athens with a layover there. First flight was very nice, left almost on time. I have pre-ordered Halal meal for this flight and I must say it was one of the best meals I have ever had. Athens airport has got a bit better from last year, so it was easy to connect there and I was also able to get some sleep at the airport. Second flight was leaving at 5.15am, the boarding via a bus was a bit chaotic but managable, flight was very short and we also received a chocolate croissant.	1
Berlin to Athens. Aegean has been my preferred airline when traveling to and from Greece. The aircraft are new, clean, and have a lot of leg space. The staff are very friendly and the food and beverage are one of the top I have had in regional flights. Flight are time never causing me delays. Also the price is very good. An excellent airline and highly recommended.	1
TXL to SOF return. Really can't complain about their short haul product - both flights were on time a drink and a snack offered and crew on both legs were friendly enough. At least the short haul service is comparable to established airlines such as Lufthansa or BA. Will definitely use them again in the future.	1
Los Angeles to Hong Kong return via Beijing. I am handicapped and need a wheel chair in airports. I loved every minute on this flight. The food was different, but I wanted to begin my Chinese experience this way. I liked most of it. The beverage choice was great andt entertainment system was fast. I appreciated the kindness of flight attendants, once I sat she came over and took off my shoes and put on slippers. Later on, I went to the toilet and when I returned she helped me turn down my bed and tucked me in.  Upon landing was instructed to remain in the aircraft until all passengers deplaned so the wheelchair would be available. The toilets were kept clean. Beijing to Hong Kong portion was in economy, but the service remained as good. I shall fly this airline again.	1
I had a flight into Edmonton for a few meetings, and was scheduled to fly out immediately the next day. Somehow, I managed to join the same flight attendant crew on both flights. The Service Director, Dimitry, recognized me on the second flight and gave me a handwritten card expressing the crew's appreciation for little old me, economy class passenger, who was rushing to get home. What a nice touch! I showed it to my colleague who does the flight bookings for everyone in our office who's said she's never seen anything like that before. I really appreciated that kind gesture and excellent attention to detail! Air Canada is lucky to have such incredible and thoughtful staff.	1
Athens to Milano. I think that Aegean has a very good economy class product for short haul flights within Europe. Seat is quite comfortable and since you can book your seat 48hrs in advance using the echeckin services, you can select an emergency exit row free of charge. Lot of other airlines will charge you with 15 to 20 euros for such a seat. Then it is one of the few airlines which still serve a hot meal. For the flight between Athens to Milano other companies serve a cold sandwich. We have been served a hot breakfast plus yougurt with honey, juices and coffee. Plane departed with 15 minutes delay but we arrived on time	1
WAW-TXL-AUH-HKT-AUH-TXL-WAW. Flight from WAW to TXL on a new Bombardier Q400 short and smooth. Flights from TXL to AUH and from AUH to HKT on the A330-200 were half empty so it was very comfortable having 4 seats in the middle row to sleep all by myself. Same thing on the way back. Service was great as well I can't complain at all.	1
Like I indicated below - nothing but excellent. Flew from LAX to Mokba and back. Very outstanding service. Check in easy quick and efficient. The food flying back from Mokba was very good. Sat in the first row right were the bathrooms are and was very impressed how ALL flight attendants were constantly checking and cleaning the bathrooms (our American airlines should really take notice of that. Their bathrooms are not clean - to say the least). Also the flight stats are throughout the whole flight very nicely displayed - including nearest towns at what direction and distance - never saw that with our airlines. It also shows "pilot view" of take-off and landing - loved that. Actually could recognize all people on the ground shortly before touch down watching the descending airplane at LAX with flashes going off like crazy. In the future I will try to book Aeroflot wherever available.	1
Flew Aegean Airlines from Athens to Copenhagen. Absolutely perfect. Nice staff and very friendly with us. A brand new and clean aircraft with very good inflight entertainment. Lastly the food was very good and tasteful but the ticket was a little bit expensive.	1
This is not the first time that I've flown on Aegean Airlines. Every time I've use this airline I was satisfied. This time however from Kalamata to Lyon it might be the best flight I ever taken. I did my check-in online which went fine. The check-in line up at Kalamata airport was fine the waiting was not very long. The flight was on time and even landed at Lyon earlier than scheduled. The only entertaiment was the airline's magazine. The cabin crew was probably the best that I ever experienced. The service was amazing with a tasty hot meal on a short flight. Also the flight attendants were nice and friendly and even went the extra mile by asking me if needed anything else. Overall Aegean airline is probably one of the best short haul airlines. I would not hesitate to fly back with them even if I need to make a connection into a different city.	1
Dublin to Chicago. I do so wish that airlines would reflect their nationality in their food. Asian airlines do, to an extent, and i suppose Alitalia and Aair France serve something that identifies them. But sadly most airlines don’t. Chicken or fish, you get the idea. But on Aer Lingus a small revelation. An unpromising main course was “chicken in a savoury sauce” but the entire lunch was Ireland on a plate. Soda bread, a salmon starter, irish cheese but the entree sang out, “ this is Ireland” I can’t explain it more. The whole flight was very pleasant- service, seating, all pretty good. But that simple lunch will stay in my memory for a long time	1
I flew Dublin To Boston return with Aer Lingus on an A330. Pre-clearance at Dublin is great as one then arrives in US as a domestic flight. Left an hour late due to TSA hold up. Return flight 90 minutes late leaving, minor mechanical issue. Had exit row seat and no one next to me on return. Crew very good both ways.	1
Air Berlin from TXL to VCE and back. Everything went extremely smoothly. Free seat next to me (as a Topbonus Gold member) pre-ordered food was on board and very nice (Indian vegetarian curry) cabin crew very friendly and professional both flights a few minutes ahead of schedule luggage among the first 5 bags on belt. Air Berlin at its best!	1
I had wheelchair assist all the way from Melbourne to Beijing, to Guangzhou, back to Beijing and home to Melbourne as find walking a long way with two artificial knees a problem. They were fantastic. The food was great. I flew night time both ways and water was being offered with the hostess walking up the aisles all night if you wanted it. On board entertainment was great. Could not fault the airline.	1
Athens to Istanbul in August 2016. I have flown Aegean over a dozen times over the past 3 years . I travel to Greece almost every year from Australia and one of the most enjoyable parts is the service from Aegean Airline cabin crew. I have been recently upgraded to Silver Aegean Miles + Bonus and have been given two complimentary business class upgrades that I will be using this year. I recommend Aegean Airlines to anyone who travels in and around Europe on routes offered by the Airline.	1
After a multi-year hiatus from flying Air Canada due to poor past performance, we we absolutely astonished. This is not the Air Canada of yesteryear this felt like a brand-new airline. Gate agents were smiling, in-flight team was excellent, seat pitch was fine and seat comfort excellent, even for my 6’2” frame. Food was excellent and well-priced. IFE was superb and the Thales multi-featured moving map is outstanding. Great job AC.	1
It was my first flight with Aeroflot from LAX to Rome Italy through Moscow. It was a very pleasant flight and definitely will fly them again. The flight was on time the food excellent FA's were very polite and in Moscow City Aeroport Sheremetyevo the accommodation was superb. There is a Capsule hotel on 3rd floor and for 4 hours $103 we got a nice clean room with comfortable beds and a bathroom.	1
Barcelona to Athens. Due to the Easter season, all passengers were given chocolate Easter eggs. The flight was on time. The airplane was very clean, along with the bathroom. Hot towels with lavender scent were provided, and a welcome drink was given. The food was excellent. The seats were leather, and reclined well. The airline magazine was available to every passenger, while a tour of Greece and Cyprus played on overhead TV's. Inflight shopping was available. The crew spoke good English. One of the best flights I have even been on, and would certainly fly with Aegean Airlines again.	1
I traveled onboard Aer Lingus flight 136 to Dublin last night. The experience was excellent and professional from check-in to landing into Dublin Airport. The ground crew were excellent. The onboard experience was wonderful with fantastic cabin crew who warmly greeted all passengers as they boarded the aircraft. My seat of 11-C was very comfortable with plenty of legroom. The service was excellent throughout the flight. Beverages kept flowing throughout the flight. The meal service was excellent. I have to say it was the best flight I have had and I greatly appreciate flying with my country's flag carrier. Aer Lingus, please keep up the great service.	1
Called Air Canada from Frankfurt to change my flight, was not able to do this online. The customer service rep was incredible, she was able to assist me, after I tried to do it myself for over an hour online. This was the best customer service experience I have ever had from any airlines. This representative did what I couldn't do in a couple of minutes. I waited less than 5 minutes on hold, I will recommend Air Canada to my family, friends and everyone else.	1
Flew from Athens to Frankfurt. The aircrafts are new and clean. The crew always have a big smile and are ready to assist the passengers with any problem. The pilots are experienced and I always feel comfortable flying with Aegean. The food quality is excellent and the quantity is adequate. My first choice when I fly.	1
Hamburg to Athens. The flight was excellent, very punctual and the crew are really very friendly. I received an excellent service. A delicious meal was also offered. They offer everything for free including drinks. The crew care about you with a very warm smile.	1
Paris (Orly) - Berlin (Tegel) short haul flight and very pleased with this airline. Plane was a fairly new 737-700 comfortable clean nice lighting and professional attendants. On time departure well maybe 5 minutes late but arrived in Berlin ahead of schedule. Nice snacks and beverages at no cost. All in all I do recommend this airline from my experience.	1
A good flight from Calgary to Frankfurt in premium economy. There was a slight initial delay due to weather on the departure end, but time was made up once we were in the air. The service was friendly as usual, and the plane was clean. Entertainment was good, with a choice of many genres of movies in different languages. The intercom system wasn't working too well, with the result that the safety announcements weren't fully audible - but everyone knows all about those anyway. I'm flummoxed by the negative reviews on this site, particularly in areas that the airlines themselves have no control over (weather delays, seat designs, etc). But I have personally never had an issue with Air Canada rouge.	1
Thessaloniki to Munich. It is the best airline I have flown and Aegean airlines respects each passeger. Flight only lasted two hours and the meal offered is not common in short flights operated by other airlines in Europe. Cabin crew is so nice. I recommend everyone to use this airline.	1
Amsterdam to Rhodes. It is a pleasure flying with Aegean Airlines. The crew is friendly and the service is one of those you rarely find. Aegean Airlines is a company with personality always behave its clients as it should, and I am always satisfied with its services.	1
Very pleasant flight from Berlin Tegel to Athens. Flight was a bit more expensive than the competition, but still cheap (47EUR for a one way ticket). It was really worth though, cause the flight time was much more civilized (11.15am). The flight was about 50% full, there was plenty of space and no issues with hand luggage. Departed and arrived on time. Ordered the kosher meal, which was really great in terms of both quality and quantity. Plenty of drinks (food and drinks are included in the price of the ticket). Choice of seat also for free, so I requested an emergency exit seat. All in all, a slightly more expensive flight than the low cost competition, but taken into account the ancillary included, the food and drinks, the convenience and the flight times, it was well worth the price. Keep on the good job!	1
Copenhagen to Berlin and Berlin to Paris 28 May and return 5 June Paris to Berlin and Berlin to Copenhagen. Sceptical as the tickets were relatively cheap. Surprised by the excellent service: all flights were clean and well maintained we got a free drink snacks free newspapers and the leg space was reasonable. While leaving the flight we got Air Berlin chocolates from staff with a smile. Staff were kind. Overall I had a very nice and experience and would travel them again.	1
I've always loved Air Canada and their service. I was coming back to Edmonton from Puerto Vallarta a day after Christmas. My friend got really sick before the flight (food poisoning), the flight attendant was very proactive and concerned about my friends condition, she checked up on us several times, offered peppermint/lemon tea to my friend in order to help her upset stomach. She was very accommodating and her fellow crew member was also very kind and tended to our needs. This experience reassures me that in the future if I needed assistance, they will help me with top-notch service just like the experience my friend received.	1
Las Vegas to Calgary. My wife and I flew in Business Class on an Air Canada Rouge flight from Las Vegas to Calgary. Typically, the Business Class service on Rouge is good - on this flight it was exceptional. One Flight Attendant went above and beyond to provide excellent customer service. He made our flight a real pleasure and deserves credit for his efforts. We are very grateful for his care and attentions	1
We sat in seats 2D and 2F. From the check in at the Priority Counter to getting off the aircraft at West Palm Beach, were were exceptionally pleased with the service we received. We would like to mention specifically the wheel chair assistance for my wife and the flight attendant in our cabin. All of them were exceptional. Please pass along our comments to the Air Canada staff	1
Flew Athens to Madrid. Aegean, in business or economy (most of my flights), is the best. Punctuality, cabin service, ground staff, call center, frequent flyer programme is excellent. I only regret that they principally fly A320 instead of A321. Cabin crew are pleasant and professional.	1
Athens to Frankfurt. Overall excellent experience. The flight was fully booked, but boarding was on time, fast and easy. The cabin crew was very friendly and helpful and the flight arrived on time. The only glitch is that one of my suitcases arrived broken, but that is the responsibility of the Frankfurt Airport staff and not the airline. Nonetheless, Aegean offered me a new suitcase for replacement for free.	1
Athens to Milan with Aegean Airlines. Excellent flying experience. Despite the flight being full (and overbooked, however they asked for volunteers to be booked on the next available flight, get compensation and a free ticket) they boarded everyone with small delay and landed us on time. Seat, I was on 2F, clean and very comfortable, featuring excellent legroom space. Staff smiling and very friendly. Meal was a great surprise. They offer a tasteful first and second course, with options and selections of traditional food from various regions in Greece. Wine list was also good. The dessert was a delicious cake served with greek yoghurt.	1
I travelled  from Mytilini to Athens and it was one of the best flights I Have had, with a smooth landing. The seats were comfortable enough. Food was served, even though the flight was only 45 minutes. Aegean Airlines manages to provide better services than other bigger airlines even in shorter routes. Definitely deserves 4 stars.	1
Santiago De Compostela to Dublin with Air Lingus. Crew utterly professional and friendly from the word go. They engaged with passengers and freely struck up conversation with travellers, most of whom had been there to complete the Camino de Santiago. Boarding was well organised and swift, even with only one Iberia gate agent. There was a huge amount of cabin baggage, some of which exceeded the allowance, but the air stewards did their utmost to accommodate all bags and therefore avoided bags having to be placed in the hold and ultimately delay the flight. Flight left and arrived on time. Pilots provided flight information on a couple of occasions. I always enjoy flying Aer Lingus and the crew are a credit to our national carrier.	1
Excellent flying experience from Dublin to New York return.  Aircraft was nearly new, usb socket at seat, great IFE, decent leg room and recline. What stood out most was the exceptional crew, so friendly and helpful. A passenger behind me was feeling poorly and I overheard a flight attendant offering to make this passenger hot water, honey and lemon. That speaks volumes.  The only issue was lost baggage which does happen frequently I believe but even still I rate the flight and airline 10/10.	1
We were delighted with our flights from Chicago to Dublin and then Dublin to JFK on the return leg. Boarding went smoothly and the aircraft was clean and in excellent condition. On our Chicago to Dublin leg the A330 was less than one year old. Entertainment system was excellent with many music and movie choices, which kept both adults and kids entertained. The newer aircraft on the first leg included a USB charging port at each seat. Food was surprisingly good, with a nice roast chicken entree offered on the DUB-JFK leg. Alcoholic beverages were about 6 Euros no free booze in Economy. Seat comfort was actually quite good. I had plenty of leg and knee room despite being over 6 feet tall. Seat padding is a little thin, so if you are sensitive to that you might consider one of those airline seat pads. We were thoroughly impressed by the cabin crew - consistently friendly, helpful, cheerful. Unlike on the American carriers, they did not simply serve the meal and disappear. They were very helpful with our young children as well. Flights left the gate a bit late but arrived on schedule. The captain made such a soft landing at JFK that the whole plane clapped! And I should add the fare we paid was about $500 less than what AA and United were charging. The only negative was the WiFi, which I paid for on the first leg but only worked for about 30 minutes.	1
I would like to thank the amazing crew on flight AC1777 from Puerto Plata to Toronto for bringing the Haloween spirit into our Halloween evening flight, greeting passengers with Happy Halloween wishes dressed with Halloween Head bands and giving out candies to passengers. It was very heartwarming, exciting and pleasant and it made me feel so blessed that I live in such a beautiful and rich in tradition country. Maybe I will be lucky to fly with them again on Air Canada Rouge flights. Thank you also to Captain and his assistant. I fly quite often with Air Canada Rouge and as a senior I am very grateful for great service, great price and safe flights.	1
Cabin crew service remains top class. In an age where most airlines across Europe are abandoning inflight service, Aegean crew made at least three runs delivering drinks. The hot meal served (pastitsio) was superb, together with Greek salad and Greek desert. We were also welcomed on board with a gift-wrapped pomegranate as a lucky charm for the New Year. The plane was new and spotless. The flight was on time. Aegean crew are to be congratulated for their warm welcome and hard work throughout the four hour flight. Flying Aegean is always a treat!	1
Zurich to Toronto. We had bulkhead seats as my husband is 6 foot 7. They were great for him. Even though the flight had a fair amount of turbulence, the crew kept at it with awesome service. We used the entertainment and liked the selections available to us. For us it was the happy crew and the service that made this flight great. Thanks!	1
Toronto to Amsterdam. This was a great flight with super attentive staff. They really had the service ethic down pat. Our seats were very comfortable and as the flight was fairly quiet. The take off and landing were easy and we both arrived as refreshed as you could expect. We will fly with this airline again!	1
9th December from Krasnodar to Moscow Sheremetyevo on Flight SU 1103 and missed the connection to Flight SU 263 to London Heathrow. I flew yesterday on Aeroflot and experienced delays and missed connection through no fault of Aeroflot. I was dealt with by their many ground staff at Sheremetyevo extremely well the plane was modern and well flown and I would strongly recommend them for the service I received. Full marks and strongly recommended.	1
Dublin to London Heathrow return. I was planning a day trip to London, and as I hadn’t travelled through Heathrow for over two years, I was curious to see how it had evolved since 09th July 2014 when Aer Lingus moved their operation from Heathrow Terminal 1 to Terminal 2. At the time, four main benefits arising from moving to T2 were heavily publicised:  Public transport within 15 minutes of landing. Luxurious Gold Circle Lounge within minutes of check in.  State of the art facilities. A seamless faster security and check in process. In addition, this was my first booking since the introduction of Aer Lingus’ loyalty programme, now named “Aer Club”. The booking process on Aer Lingus website remains broadly the same. The three fare types are now named Saver, Plus & Advantage with each earning a different amount of tier credits. One benefit I noticed is that when selecting the Plus fare, all seats are now included as complimentary: heretofore the front rows had to be paid for. As I was travelling within the 30 day window, I was able to check in immediately and print my boarding passes. I arrived at Dublin Airport at 7.00am for my 0845 am flight. I wanted to enquire about changing my seat on the outbound leg, and I called to the Gold Circle check in desk. Staff greeted me with a smile and within seconds had issued me with a new boarding card, and wished me a pleasant flight. My current Aer Club tier is Silver which includes fast track security. Only two people were in front of me and I was airside within a couple of minutes. I had a quick look around the bookshop and made my way to the Lounge, where I was greeted by the same staff with whom I dealt at the Gold Circle desk. We joked about the speed with which she moved from the check-in area to the lounge. Definitely the complete antithesis of the fabled lounge dragon! At approximately 8.20am, I made my way to gate 409 where boarding was underway. There are two separate boarding lines: General and Priority (for Aer Club members, flexible ticket holders) and it works very well. While walking towards the airbridge, passengers sitting in the rear half of the aircraft are directed towards steps at the rear door, and the front half board via the airbridge. This speeds up the boarding process, particularly on busy flights. The A320 was clean , and cabin crew warmly welcomed passengers. After a safety briefing and flight information from the Captain, we were underway quickly. During the flight, I indulged in the Irish Breakfast. Not the cheapest at 10 euro, but very tasty indeed. We landed on time in Heathrow, and after a short taxi were on stand at 11am. We deplaned quickly, and  I was sitting on the Tube at 11.15am.	1
We flew Air Canada Rouge nonstop round trip from Toronto to Venice in July. The equipment in both directions was a Boeing 767-300ER, which was obviously an older aircraft from AC’s livery. My family and I were expecting the worst after reading multiple horrific reviews of AC Rouge online, and it seemed like we were going to pay a serious penalty for the very low advance fare we found to fly their “Premium Rouge” product. Happily, our experience was fantastic and we’d fly this discount airline again in a second. Upon boarding on both ends of our journey, we were offered glasses of water or juice and hot towel service. Meals on both flights were a notch above what I’ve experienced on legacy carriers in US domestic first in recent years everything was served on ceramic plates with stainless silverware and linen napkins. Wine and cocktails were complimentary in this class, and while not a varied menu, the service was generous. The seating is very comfortable seat pitch is listed  as 37”, and that seemed accurate. I am a big guy at 6’2” (1.88m) and 280 lbs (127kg) and was completely at ease with plenty of room to stretch out. The 767 does not have individual air jets for circulation, but this did not bother me on these flights. If you’re concerned it will, you may want to pack a USB-powered fan. Every 2-seat row in premium rouge has a power outlet that accepts 110-220v plugs. When the person in front of you fully reclines, these outlets are tricky to access, so figure it out when you get seated. As mentioned in other reviews, to use in-flight-entertainment on these planes, you need to download the Air Canada app on your iOS or Android device ahead of time, or use the provided iPads onboard (free for Premium, charge for other classes). It works very well and has a decent selection of movies. Note that the onboard streaming system will not work during the flight’s climb-out up to about 10K feet (approx the first 20-30 mins. of the flight). Premium rouge passengers also receive priority boarding and priority baggage handling - our luggage was waiting for us when we cleared customs in Venice, which was very unexpected given our past experience at this airport. Our in-flight crews could not have been more kind or professional legacy carriers in the US could seriously take a lesson from these folks. If you are looking for lie-flat seats and the like, this is not your airline. If you are flying your family for vacation and want a reasonably priced product that offers a very nice international premium economy product, than look no further than Air Canada Rouge.	1
Moscow-Tenerife on A330-300 long haul. The service was incredible (actually as usual on Aeroflot long haul flights in business class compared to short haul it is better). Our plane was delayed but we arrived only 7 minutes later than it was proposed). Cabin was originally designed for EgyptAir and it was very good. Entertainment system has a big variety of films and all films can be watched in either Russian or English. In my opinion Aeroflot on long hauls is much better than the majority of other European airlines.	1
London to Hong Kong via Moscow return. All flights you couldn't fault food of good standard flight attendants smart and professional great selection of entertainment only problem was other passengers getting up before plane had stopped at terminals. You know who you are and it makes life very difficult for the flight attendants.	1
Villahermosa to Oaxaca via Mexico City. I have flown 7 domestic Aeromexico flights since November and have 4 more planned. I've been happy with the service every time. Peanuts in flight - take a sandwich if it's over a meal time! The staff are helpful but do speak Spanish - we are in a Spanish speaking country!  Mexico City terminal 2 is easy and has lots of good / shopping options should you wish them.	1
Beijing to Manila. This is the second time in a year I have flown with Air China, and I can't sing there praises high enough. The price of a ticket for me to fly to the Philippines was cheaper than a return train ticket from London to Edinburgh! I've always believe there level of service is spot on. It's the Chinese national flag carrier so it's going to be catered more towards that culture. But there is plenty of movies, documentaries and music to keep you entertained. The food was perfect and the Chinese beer is excellent. Highly recommend this airline.	1
Beijing to Singapore. With a decent price tag, the meal was tasty, the crews were friendly and professional on the flight, offered drink service after the meal service. Overall I would choose to fly with Air China again.	1
I truly enjoyed my flight from Toronto to San Diego, Cal. The flight was #1887 on March 28th, 2017. The plane was nice and clean and the flight was extremely smooth. However, what made it extremely pleasant was the lead flight attendant. She made announcements in English and impeccable French.  She was tender and extremely helpful. She truly made my day with her bright smile and helpful attitude. She noticed that my head was not comfortable, so without my asking, she brought a pillow. Never seen that before.	1
London to Guadalajara via Mexico City. I flew Aeromexico for the first time to visit my GF's family in Mexico, and I was pleasantly surprised at how good the service was. The journey started at Heathrow Terminal 4 (which is pretty bad) but onboard I was treated to an extent of luxury that some bigger airlines have forgotten. My connection in Mexico City was smooth and well organised with a minimum waiting time for my second flight. A great airline and will recommend to anyone to fly with them.	1
Rome to Athens with Aegean Airlines. The aircraft was very clean and the seats were spotless. But what set the airline apart were the flight attendants, its amazing what a genuine smile can do to a passenger. All the crew seemed genuinely happy to be doing their job. I sat in the row behind my family and spoke to the two ladies beside me and they felt the same way. Getting off I mentioned to one of the girls how I felt and got another genuine smile - well done indeed Aegean.	1
My wife and I flew Aegean Airlines from Santorini to Athens in a Airbus A320, overnight in Athens and on to Heathrow the next day in a Airbus A321. Both flights were full and left and arrived on time. A choc-chip cookie was served on the short Athens leg with a full meal and bar service on the flight to London.	1
Athens to Rome, and my third flight with Aegean Airlines, and they improved their service the last 2 years. For a 2 hour flight the service was equal as a part of an intercontinental flight. No IFE - not sure if need in a short flight with a regional carrier, but in any case not many airlines in Europe offer this value for money. Compliments.	1
Flew Aegean Airlines from London Heathrow to Samos via Athens, and the first time I have flown with this airline. Very good cabin crew, leg room much more then a lot of airlines, I am 6 ft and I still had plenty of leg room. Meal was good and a complementary drink. When I fly in summer I use Thomson (TUI) direct to Samos, but I have to say Aegean Airlines is better, and a better price with more luggage allowance on a flexi ticket. Would recommend and use again.	1
Toronto to Las Vegas. It was not as bad as I thought it would be. Their business class product is not like Air Canada's business class but it had almost the same style of food menu and drinks are served in glass. They had two red wine selections to choose from. Other than the ice cream and fresh baked cookies that you would receive on a long haul west coast flight with Air Canada business class this product was not that bad. Service was outstanding on both legs of this trip from YYZ-LAS and return on the red eye from LAS-YYZ. Only exception and difference is the seat on the B767-300 business class on rouge is not a sleeper pod seat like you would have found on Air Canada business class. Also note that the name for business class on Air Canada Rouge is Premium Rouge.	1
Flew Air Canada rouge from Las Vegas to Calgary. Excellent service from the Montreal based cabin crew. Flew economy but purchased meal at time of booking. Served a meal from business class along with a warm fresh bread roll. Watched a movie on my Samsung Tablet via streaming player service of the airline. I am 5'10" and found the seats adequate. I would fly with them again for certain.	1
Flew with Aegean Airlines on January 17 from Athens to Frankfurt. The flight was nearly full but the cabin crew did a great job at providing everyone with a full meal service and two rounds of drink service. We left and arrived on time without any hassles. There is a lot of legroom available and the seats were very comfortable.	1
I really enjoyed this flight with Air Canada. The Toronto Maple Leaf Lounge was comfortable with some excellent food on offer and I was able to find a very comfortable chair and get some work done. The flight was delayed a little but we arrived in Vancouver on-time. Overall it was a smooth ride with little turbulence. The Dreamliner is a very comfortable quiet plane and one of my favorites in the Air Canada fleet. The staff were friendly and attentive. I like the Air Canada app as I was able to pick out the films I wanted to watch and I appreciated all the choices. There are quite a few I look forward to watching on my next flight. It was great having access to wifi. Dinner and the wine were excellent. I appreciate I can review the menu on the Air Canada app before the flight. This year it has been great to be back traveling and I'll continue to be a regular customer. I look forward to my next flight.	1
Larnaca to Athens and a great flight with Aegean Airlines. Departed on-time after a quick boarding. The inflight meal consisted of a cheese pastry followed by 2 beverage services. The flight was quick, enjoyable and comfortable. We landed early and disembarked right away.	1
One more nice experience with Aegean Airlines! On time both flights, great flight attendants, good food and very clean cabin. Cannot ask anything more. Load factor was around 80% on ATH-MAD and 90% on MAD-ATH. Only thing is that they have to improve their in-flight entertainment	1
London to Athens with Aegean Airlines. Polite and easy check in. Efficient boarding with priority given to Business Class. Welcome was with a smile and very courteous crew. Spotless aircraft. Drinks served swiftly followed by excellent meal from a menu with 2 choices of main. Good selection of wines including some award winning Greek ones. Hot towels again served by polite and elegant crew. Landed early. An excellent airline and recommended.	1
MIA-DUS Business Class. Boarding quick and on time arrival in Dusseldorf on time. Business class is not comparable to others as the seats don't fully recline. This was more than compensated by very comfortable seats and a seat distance which is quite generous - you can easily step over neighbours seat. Crew was friendly and attentive. In view of the price business class is value for money if you don't need full recline on your seat but favour more space and friendly service.	1
This was my first trip anywhere since the pandemic (2019) & even longer since I flew with Air Canada. I was hesitant, but I was impressed with Air Canada. Minimal delays & good service - to Peru & back. But I want to give a special shout out to Adelfredo (I hope I have spelled his name correctly). He is a ticketing agent at Miami Airport. He really assisted me today. He was at that desk since 6am & he still had a smile on his handsome face.  I really appreciated everything you did for me.  To Air Canada, please keep up the good work. I don't like to hear or read bad reviews about anything that says Canada.	1
Business class Vancouver to Dusseldorf. AB uses the Priority Pass lounge at YVR which was fine. No current newspapers due to a delivery problem but when asked about this the concierge immediately went and purchased a copy. Business Class was only half full at the end of AB's summer schedule. Food was fantastic - a choice of four entrees plus a fifth 'special' dish available. Seats in Business are old type non-flat bed with limited video choices however they were comfortable. On time arrival in Dusseldorf which is an easy airport to navigate. A great bargain and a great flight.	1
Have flown London to Athens and Athens - Mykonos route many times and find the same high level of service. Cabin crew with smart uniforms and the welcome is with a smile. Boarding was quick and flight time was just 25 minutes. No drinks are served as the flight time is too short, but we were given sweets and a croissant. Aircraft was clean and seats were comfortable. I am puzzled as to why Aegean Airlines has not been upgraded to a 4 star airline. Their level of service is better than some 4 star carriers. 	1
Mykonos to Athens with Aegean Airlines. Check in was easy despite a queue. Ground staff were polite and efficient using perfect English. Aircraft was an A319, spotless interior and welcomed on board by very elegant and immaculately dressed cabin crew with sincere smiles. A tray of sweets was offered to passengers once seated. On time departure and only a 20 minute flight, the crew still served individually wrapped croissants, napkins and refreshment wipes before landing. All served without stress or fuss. Upon deplaning, again the goodbye was sincere with a smile and a thank you. Aegean are a great airline whom I thoroughly recommend.	1
Aegean Airlines from Santorini to Zurich via Athens, and after many cancelled flights from Athens there were many unhappy customers in the Santorini airport. The staff were fantastic and professional. Considering the bad mood of people they were as helpful as they could be. We flew them a few times during our trip and every time was a great experience. The flight attendants were  great, the pilots very informative and flew a smooth flight every time. The meals and snacks provided were a good surprise. They made our time in Europe great. Thank you Aegean Airlines for a great anniversary trip.	1
Excellent service from take off to landing on Aegean Airlines flight from Athens to Manchester. Cabin crew are immaculate, efficient and professional. Aircraft was clean and comfortable, take off and landing exceptionally smooth. Looking forward to flying with Aegean airlines again soon. Thank you for a pleasant journey.	1
Birmingham to San Francisco via Dublin was my first international flight with Aer Lingus and I would fly with them again. I became aware of them by chance when seeking flights to San Fransisco to visit my daughter. Usually I fly from one of the London airports which is not very convenient, flying from Birmingham via Dublin with connecting flights was seamless with Aer Lingus. Another advantage was pre-clearing American Customs and Immigration at Dublin airport, again seamless and extremely well managed. The flight in economy was in my opinion as good, or better than other major carriers and the price was very competitive. I found Aer Lingus Staff, both on the ground and the cabin Staff to be courteous, friendly and helpful. 	1
TXL-BKK return. Nice FA's on both flights. Leg Room could be bigger but was ok. Meals where hot and of good taste. No Delay. Luggage was there on time and without any damages.	1
My first flight with Aeromexico on the Boeing 787. Online check in quick and easy. Seat was very good with ample legroom and comfort. Food was excellent. Staff were very courteous, attentive rand well mannered.  This trip was equal to any BA flight I've been on. A couple of minus points. Our seating area had not been cleaned very well and the earphones were broken but the latter problem was resolved very quickly. I will certainly use Aeromexico again.	1
I was very happy with the service from Aegean Airlines flying from ATH to CDG. Check-in was smooth and very easy. Then headed to the lounge, as I am a Gold member of their frequent flier program, Miles and Bonus. The lounge wasn't anything special, but it was still nice to relax with a beer before take-off. The flight itself was great. Cabin crew were very attentive, helpful, and friendly during boarding. They even spoke French. The hot meal provided in economy class along with the nice selection of beverages (including alcohol), was delicious. The plane I was on seemed new and very clean. In general, Aegean made my flying a real pleasure, and I will not hesitate choose them again for my travels in Europe!	1
I have flown with Aer Lingus a few times to cross the Atlantic, the staff are always pleasant and helpful. The food and service is also great. Economy leg room isn't great but not the worst I have seen. The inflight entertainment on the aircraft I was on - EI-EWR was terrible, the videos constantly froze and didn't work at all which was a first for me as on other Aer Lingus planes I have been on the entertainment worked fine. The wifi service however did work fine during the flight, there was a slight interruption of coverage but it was fine otherwise. My flight was to Boston with Aer Lingus then onward to Detroit with JetBlue. I booked it all with Aer Lingus. Overall a great airline as expected from the national Irish airline.	1
STR-HAM one way. Very pleasant flight no lines at check-in on time nice cabin crew one round of drinks with choice of cookies or crackers 737-700 clean and well prepared. Pitch between seats could be one or two inches more. Cheap fare since we booked 4 months in advance. Overall: very good!	1
The two crew ladies at the boarding door were very polite and courteous. They have maintained a smooth flow of passengers and are courteous to people on wheelchair. Her announcements are very clear. It's a packed flight. Crew members are cooperative.	1
I had booked an Economy Ticket through Aegean Airlines.com. Which was very easy website. At my check-in it wasn't possible to sit in Economy Class because it was full, so they changed me into the Business Class. What a great experience. It was my first time in Business Class. First a drink before take off, an appetizer, hot meal that I could chose and a dessert. And before landing one spirit. Drinks as much as I wanted.  I would really recommend Aegean Airlines if you travel in Europe to Greece.	1
This airline is a pleasure to fly. Courteous and professional flight attendants, clean cabins, meals and alcoholic beverages served for free on international flights, even candies distributed before take off. It seems that Aegean Airlines took a look back to the nicer days of flying and made sure to bring back all of the now-missing elements of a pleasant flying experience. Highly recommended.	1
Liverpool to Dublin with Aer Lingus. Can't express enough my thanks and appreciation for making my first ever flight such a wonderful experience. The cabin crew were excellent and once they found out it was my first flight at the age of 71, they went out of their way to offer me reassurance. They even offered me a local newspaper and provided me with a glass of proseco. I would highly recommend the cabin crew and Aer Lingus for their professionalism and making my journey pleasurable.	1
Our flight was with Aer Lingus from Dublin to London Heathrow, they were brilliant with my son, who is an adult on the autism spectrum, so he was happy just to be on the plane. The seats were very comfortable for an A320. Loved that they played good music whilst we were waiting and the captain kept us up to date as to when we would leave. Inflight the food service was good, staff very professional and made you feel welcome on board. I would fly with them again.	1
FRA-TXL-BKK in C. Very friendly staff. Good Menus. Super service from BKK-Pattaya free Limousine service. Sure we fly again with Air Berlin.	1
Salzburg to Berlin and Berlin to Dusseldorf and extremely impressed. I paid very cheap rates for European flights (only about 90 euros per person) but got very good treatment - from newspapers and magazines to a nice snack and drinks. Seats comfortable. I couldn't get over the fact that this was supposed to be a low cost airline.	1
Short flight from Istanbul Ataturk to Athens. Checked in via kiosk and had only carry on baggage. Very smooth process. Boarded a little late and took off late as is with most flights leaving from Ataturk Airport. On board service was very good. Meal was very acceptable. Aircraft was very clean too. It was a pleasure to fly with Aegean and I highly recommend them.	1
Early morning flight to Crete from Athens International. Boarding process was quick and friendly, crew were really good especially considering the time of day of the flight. Flight was quick and offloading process was really quick and easy. Had to deal with Aegean call centre to make changes to an existing booking in order to take this flight. I have to say they were the most helpful and friendly call centre I have ever dealt with. They made changes to my booking and re-routed my flights to accommodate my holiday plans while in Greece. They explained the charges and refunds very clearly and resolved the matter quickly. What a wonderful airline to deal with.	1
Easy check in, lounge access and boarding experience although announcements were difficult to hear from the lounge at Heraklion Airport. Inflight service was great. Crew were friendly and helpful including pilots with their announcements. Cannot fault this airline. They are simple and easy to deal with and provide a great service on super clean aircraft.	1
Despite the strike of Air traffic controllers I was informed of the changing schedule and they changed my ticket to a more convenient time and day. SKG to ATH was short and on time. ATH to LHR was ready to depart 5 min ahead schedule but it was a bit delayed due to air traffic congestion; the same applied over LHR. At all points the pilot informed us promptly. New aircraft, polite crews and  a comfortable business lounge in Athens (though with no spectacular view). 	1
I just returned from a tradeshow in the Ukraine. Aeroflot offered the best fare and connections from Nice (via Moscow) so I took a chance - begrudgingly. Brand-new airbus aircraft smiling cabin crew leather seats and plenty of legroom. The crew came and greeted me to thank me for flying them - a nice touch. The food was good - even in Economy. Shrimp smoked salmon a lovely cod dish - very unexpected.	1
Flight to Larnaca was a joy. Generous legroom, nice meals and a fantastic range of drinks to choose from. Crew was attentive and it is nice that Aegean leave the cockpit door open during boarding..	1
STN-SZG and MUC-HAJ-STN. Excellent for economy tickets and better than competitors. When the first leg of our return flight was delayed (which would mean we would have missed our connection) we were booked onto a BA direct flight to Heathrow without even having to ask. Will use again in preference to RyanAir EasyJet etc	1
Vienna to Bangkok via Beijing. My flight into Beijing from Vienna was delayed due to weather, so I missed my 8.15 connection to Bangkok. I had another flight out from Bangkok at 17.30 that day with a different airline, and there was no room on the next flight to Bangkok 4 hours later. The International dept went out of their way taking time to find me a different Air China flight direct to my ultimate destination, so I didn't have to spend more nights not sleeping in an airport. I was so relieved and grateful for their diligence. The food was good, I had the best seitan, chinese mushroom and bamboo shoot stew I have had and arrived that evening at my Thai destination in fine form. Just goes to show, never mind how much one has paid, a passenger is a passenger and deserves to be well-treated.	1
2 flights - HER to ATH (short 50 minutes) and ATH to MXP. Both went well and flights were on time. Unexpected snacks and drinks on flight. Breakfast on MXP flight. Fast check-in, friendly cabin staff and quick baggage claim.	1
Managed to get my rather large luggage quickly. First flight was on time, the A321 was clean and the Flight hosts were pleasant and friendly. Hot food was served and had an overall pleasant flight. Seats were comfortable enough, they seemed to be the same as the one Lufthansa originally put on their planes and I guess everyone went with them. Arriving in Athens there was a delay of half an hour due to congested skies as its the summer peak time. Boarded on time again a friendly staff with a good plane. They are a great choice.	1
I recently flew to Mykonos through Athens and must say it was a very pleasant experience. The Zurich - Athens - Zurich legs were in Business class, to which I was upgraded for free being a Gold Member of their program Miles and Bonus. During the inbound flight I was served a 4 course menu, with 2 choices for the main course, with excellent wines, return flight was in the morning, so breakfast with 2 choices of eggs (scrambled and omelette), fresh fruit platter, greek yoghourt and bread. Responsible for the Business class section was every time the Maitre de cabine, who was very attentive and kind. Flights were on time (ish) and transfer in Athens was easy and smooth, even though inbound luggage could not be through-checked because of the lack of customs in Mykonos Airport (it was on return though). Only slight downside was check-in at Mykonos at 6 am, with only 2 counters open and queue moving very slowly, taking me 20 minutes to check-in my suitcase. But I guess that's more a matter of the airport than the airline.	1
Dusseldorf-Miami. I was faced in July with few available seats and high fares using American Airlines and other airlines. However travelling Gatwick to Dusseldork and including an overnight stay my trip to Miami with Air Berlin saved me a fortune and I was very impressed with the Air Berlin service. Two reasonable meals as good as other transatlantic economy offerings with free complimentary wine and liqueuers which is something unheard of with AA. IFE via a shared screen but not a problem. The cabin crew were great. Security checks at Dusseldorf quick. All in all a very pleasant trip and with the bonus of an arrival at Miami 35 minutes early.	1
I flew Moscow SVO to Helsinki with Aeroflot I'm very happy with the service very helpful staff. Spacious Economy Class and a very good value for more than an hour flight. No delays on time.	1
Moscow-Volgograd round trip on new and clean 737 & Airbus 330 planes. Check-in and inflight service was excellent in spite of our very limited Russian skills. Good inflight meals at no charge. We had switched our overseas flight from Aeroflot to Delta because of poor Aeroflot reviews (should not have done that). The return Moscow-JFK Delta flight was 3 hrs late causing many on the plane to miss connections at JFK while two Aeroflot planes left on time and made their connections. SVO terminal was beautifully clean modern and bilingual with efficient service in stark contrast to the poor arrival image given by JFK.	1
We flew Heathrow-Athens return and Athens-Santorini. The entire experience was very good. We were a bit delayed on our return flight to Heathrow and were continually updated on progress. The seats were comfortable and not tight. A hot meal was served in flight - no fee and a beverage was even included. This was on a three hour flight - a really nice touch. Unfortunately, my gluten free meal which had been ordered was not on board but the flight attendant provided a very nice salad and a sincere apology. All in all, we had a very enjoyable flight each time.	1
Recently flew from BOS to SNN rountrip economy class. Excellent flight with fantastic cabin attendants, always ready to be of help. Throughout the flight the attendants constantly moved up and down the aisle checking on their passengers. Food was very good and seats quite comfortable. I'm not a great fan of the Boeing 757, but the configuration used by Aer Lingus was very spacious. Aer Lingus is always my first choice when crossing the Atlantic.	1
Gatwick to Chicago via Dublin. As a regular flier to Chicago from London, Aer Lingus is a great option. Short flight to Dublin was fine. Easy connection and pre-clearance at Dublin. A330 has very comfortable lie flat seats in 1-2-1 configuration. Lots of personal space and cabin less crowded than the equivalent BA club product. IFE very good, but movie choice a bit limited. Cabin crew very friendly, attentive and provided excellent service. Food and wine excellent. Difficult to fault and the fares are generally much cheaper than BA. And in flight wifi too, enabling me to post this review from somewhere over Canada! Aer Lingus and its Dublin hub deserve to succeed. Great way to travel to the US.	1
Zürich-Düsseldorf-Reykjavik. Excellent airline friendly staff reasonable food. Good aircraft. Return trip on SAS via Oslo was less enjoyable.	1
I use Aeroflot pretty often on my flights from Los Angeles to Moscow and domestic flights to Russian Far East. Food is great new A330-200 entertainment systems are very good with a big choice of movies. I am loyal to SkyTeam and was forced to used Delta a few times on my journeys to Russian. I realize that Aeroflot staff do not smile always but other things compensate for it. I'd rather not be hungry and bored with okay staff then be hungry and bored onboard of Delta planes.	1
Multiple trip with AE between SKG-FRA and MUC. Aircraft's were always clean service was fine food above average and quite good compared to other regular European airlines and the staff was always courteous and friendly. There were only couple times out of the last maybe 30 round trips the flight was delayed and that happened summertime when the European skies are congested. I have great respect for this airline and how nicely developed to become one of the best regional airlines of Europe.	1
Athens to Corfu on Olympic Air Bombardier Dash400-8 series aircraft (A3 402). Corfu to Athens on Aegean Airbus A320 aircraft (A3 405). Excellent service very clean cabin flights on time and smiling staff.	1
Traveled on 27 May from Zurich to Larnaca on business class. Check-in (mobile) fast and uncomplicated. Airline flew on time crew was very friendly and caring food and beverages were excellent. Information provided from crew was clear and continuous. Overall a very pleasant experience.	1
Athens-Prague on 11 May. Online check-in was quick just had to get boarding passes and to drop off bags at the airport. Despite having a bus gate boarding was organised very well and the flight departed ahead of schedule. The seats were quite comfortable and legroom was acceptable for this short flight. There was a small hot meal of pasta on the flight as well as a small dessert and drinks. Sweets were distributed before the main meal service. The red wine served on board was very good. Of note are the cabin crew who were very friendly and went around their work with smiles on their faces - this is rare these days with most airlines. The entertainment consisted of short videos on Greek island destinations and was ok though there was no audio available. Arrival into Prague on time and bags were processed within 15 minutes after leaving the aircraft. All in all Aegean is a hidden gem of an airline - I had a very good experience with Aegean and I would be glad to fly them again when I can.	1
Chicago to Dublin with Aer Lingus in Business class. Excellent service from attentive cabin crew, food and beverages were excellent. The new business class seats are great and recline flat so a decent sleep can be had. Wifi worked and at a decent speed throughout flight. Only criticism is the number of movies and TV shows available on IFE. Choice seemed limited	1
Boston to Cancun with Aeromexico was my first time flying this airline. Loved the staff and the service was great. They gave us free food included and drink, even a Corona beer and a tequila shot for free. Also had a seatback TV and watched movies. I highly recommend this airline, and I can't wait to visit Mexico again	1
Traveled on February 20th from Athens to Larnaca on Flight A3-908. I must say that the professionalism of the cabin crew was excellent. Although the flight was very short the cabin crew were smiling warm hearted to everyone and even at a time when they had to deal with a passenger that was demanding for more and more alcohol the cabin crew dealt with it with professionalism defusing the situation without embarrassing the passenger. I would definitely choose Aegean again for my trips.	1
Athens to Moscow Sheremyetevo return. New A320 polite staff good food. Price was cheap. I would fly again with Aeroflot.	1
I recently flew from Boston to Dublin alone with my 6 month old daughter. I have to highly praise the cabin crew on both flights, they were terrific and really helped me out with my very active non sleeping 6 month old. I am Irish and travel home a lot to see family and friends and after the wonderful experience I will not be nervous to travel alone with my daughter again. I've already booked my flights home for Christmas and wouldn't dream of travelling with anybody but Aer Lingus. Thank you so much.	1
Dublin to Munich return with Aer Lingus. Full flights, good onboard service, friendly crew and informative pilots. Staff were efficient and chatty. Flights on time. Highly recommended.	1
This was our first trip post Covid to Germany and as it was high season, we wanted to be comfortable so we booked J-Class for our trip to and from FRA via YYZ from YOW. Our check in at YOW was seamless as well as being very professional. The Maple Leaf Lounge was well staffed, spotlessly cleaned with very fresh tasty food and drink to enjoy. Boarding was very easy via Zone-1 and we were able to get our carry on into the overhead lockers (Full flight as well) on the new Airbus-220 in which we found clean and well appointed. Service as expected on a short inter city flight was well done by very polite professional crew. On an arrival in YYZ we transited to the Air Canada Signature Lounge where we enjoyed a small hot meal with appetizer with appropriate wine and champagne. Boarding in YYZ for FRA was seamless using Zone-1 and flight left late due to the number of passengers (full flight). On board service, food and drink selection was excellent due to the type of overseas flight. On arrival in FRA, we start at the B-Concourse with a 20-minute walk through immigration to the baggage hall where our baggage (4 pieces) was coming off the belt. On our return we changed a later flight to an earlier domestic connection easily thanks to the FRA staff. The MLL in FRA was excellent well appointed with food, drink with helpful staff. Even took advantage of having a shower before departure which was very nice. The FRA YYZ flight was exceptional service as well great food and drink. Even the Captain entered the first J Cabin to talk to passengers which was a nice touch. On arrival in YYZ no issues with customs or immigration with thanks to the Arrive Canada Ap and NEXUS. Our last flight was delayed due to a weather issue from the aircraft leaving DEN for YYZ. The CCSA kept everyone informed on delays as well as my email and Ap messaging service. On arrival in YOW our baggage arrived so no issues with this flight. In conclusion Air Canada handled itself brilliantly and the number of emails as well as text messages were very reassuring that they were doing their best to keep us informed at all times.	1
We were traveling from Fort Lauderdale to Montreal. During check in Zaira noticed that we won’t have enough time to get to our connecting flight (thank god she noticed). She then proceeded to help us get to our final destination Italy (which is where she is from). She rebooked our flight and got us a travel voucher to go to MIA. She even went above and beyond by helping us check in and get our luggage paid. Amazing service from an amazing person. She deserves a raise.	1
I had an excellent experience with Aeromexico. They took care of my dietary concerns and I was aware of the baggage policy when traveling to and from South America. Agents met me with instructions concerning my bags in both directions. 	1
Excellent Aeromexico flight from Mexico to Buenos Aires, and punctual. Outstanding service onboard, carefully prepared food which is excellent quality and quantity.	1
Flew London to Athens and then on to Ioannina and then from Ioannina to Athens and back to London. Great flight new and comfortable planes professional crew good meals and snacks. Great airline with great product. When and if I ever go to Greece again I will fly with Aegean.	1
I flew on October 5th then on to Mykonos. I then flew to Athens and then to Kos. On the 16th from Kalymnos to Athens and back to Mykonos and then on 22nd Mykonos - Athens - to Irakio Crete and then from Crete back to Athens. I must say I have had some excellent flights with Aegean. All flights on time and an excellent meal from London to Athens and this being Economy. On the internal flights you were offered a soft drink and snack. Cabin crews were extremely professional and I look forward to next October. The only downside is that: 1) They did not show any films or music available on the London flight and 2) When I booked in March I could not book the November flight home because tickets were not available so BA flew me home. I knocked a point off their food and beverages as they don't serve a gin and tonic in Economy. AS I have said I look forward to flying with them next year but they have changed the flight times to Mykonos from Athens from 7 pm to 6.30 pm which makes life difficult so they might lose this customer.	1
Orlando to Halifax via Montreal. We used another airline to fly from Florida to Halifax. But our Air Canada experience from Halifax, to Montreal, and then to Orlando, was handled really well. As we all know, many airlines are understaffed, flights are cancelled and flyers are left waiting at gates for hours while crew from another flight arrives. It's routine, every time I have flown in the last year. Our departing flight from Halifax was a half hour late. We received a prompt email and were reassured our connection in Montreal would be held for us and 16 other passengers. The counter check in was smooth. The clerk was polite and friendly. She told us the connecting flight would be held to accommodate us and the other passengers. When we arrived at the gate, announcements were made to reassure us that our trip would not be cancelled or further delayed. We boarded the flight when they said we would. Our arrival in Montreal was also guided. The clerks moved us to Priority security check-in, and then to a counter for entrance to Customs. So apparently, US nationals are put through customs in Montreal before we fly back to our country. That went smooth too. In addition to us, there were about 30 other passengers expedited through this staging area and onto Customs counters. A man directed all of us to the counters and assured us our flights were waiting for us. He was emotionally poised and seemed to know exactly what was going on with the flights. The customs counter woman was also polite. I am impressed with our experience with Air Canada and I will fly them again.	1
This was my third flight with Aegean in the last three years. I had pleasant experiences with my other two but wanted to reconfirm consistency before I rated this airline. Travelled LHR to ATH this time. Plane was clean and comfortable (for a 3 hour or so flight). My compliments to the staff. As in past flights they very pleasant warm and professional. Food served was as good as can be expected.	1
We had an amazing flight with Air Canada rouge from Las Vegas to Vancouver on Monday May 9th. The flight crew were truly amazing! Very helpful, friendly and professional. We were amazed when one of them suggested that we might be able to get my 9 year old son to visit the cockpit after the flight landed. It was an amazing experience, and the gave us an amazing experience that none of us will ever forget! It's been a while since we experienced such great customer service and we appreciate it!	1
Was anxious about what kind of service we were going to receive for our Aeromexico flight from Mexico City to Puerto Vallarta as part of our holiday, having read many poor reviews mainly from American travellers. The service was great, our check in was very straight forward, helpful staff, timely boarding, clean (new) Boeing 737-800 with very comfortable seats good entertainment system and USB charging. Short flight so refreshments service was all that was needed. Baggage was out on the belt in no time at all. Well done Aeromexico.	1
Rome to Athens June 23 2014. Flight was on-time comfortable seat spacing nice meal friendly and attentive staff. Would fly them again.	1
Travelled with Aegean Airlines from Barcelona to Athens. Flight was delayed leaving Barcelona however still managed to arrive in Athens on time. Excellent cabin service provided by attentive and polite flight attendants. Can't complain especially with the hot meal and free alcoholic beverage provided in economy class. Wish Aegean offered long haul routes to North America!	1
JIK-ATH-LHR on 11 August 2014. Return flight after week in Ikaria. Aegean flight left a few minutes late but made up time although sadly had to stack for 45 minutes at Heathrow. Excellent legroom and seat comfort. Pleasantly surprised with the quality of the meal provided and the drinks so much more than so-called cheaper airlines. Would definitely fly Aegean again. Only downside was the failure of UK Border Agency to have sufficient staff at the immigration desks at Terminal 2.	1
Domestic flights: Athens-Kerkira (Corfu) on a A319 aircraft and Ioannina-Athens on a Bombardier DHC-8-400Q (operated by Olympic Air). Excellent service on-time performance and very polite staff.	1
JMK-ATH-LHR. A3 377/A3 608 7 Aug 2014. Mykonos - Athens sector operated by Olympic Air Dash 800 aircraft. Clean inside and out and welcomed on board by very polite cabin crew. Only 2 Flight Attendants for a 20 minute flight. Departed on time and despite the fact that it was such a short flight a full drink service was offered with a variety of soft drinks napkins ice and a bag of peanuts and everyone was served. Upon landing in ATH the goodbye and thanks you greeting was polite with a smile. An excellent flight. 3 hour layover at Eleftherios Venizelos International Airport Athens was a breeze. Was given an invite to the Aegean Business Lounge on the A side of the departure terminal which was comfortable with the usual drinks and snacks available and regularly topped up. Nice clean lounge with a view of both runways. ATH-LHR Aegean Business. Departed ATH with 15 minute delay clean Airbus A321-200 aircraft. Good PA announcements by Purser and Captain. Comfortable leather seats with middle seat free. Drink service and peanuts after take off with hot towel service. Menu was provided with a choice of 2 hot main meals of chicken or swordfish with a delicious salmon entree and a selection of delicious Greek desserts. A good choice of wines including award winning Greek varieties plus the usual soft after dinner and a good selection of teas and coffees. Hot towel service again before landing. Landed on time. A very impressive service offered by Aegean. Have no hesitation about using them again.	1
I'm writing to say thank you to Aer Lingus for looking after me on a recent trip. On 21st July, I had a 6:20pm flight booked with Aer Lingus from Dublin to Birmingham. Unfortunately, I arrived at the airport late and, to make matters worse, I misplaced my carry-on luggage in the duty-free shop, which meant I couldn't make my flight. Not only did the helpful ground staff reassure me and find my case for me, a manager provided a seat on the next flight free of charge. This is the kind of service that goes above : a sympathetic and generous solution to what could have been a very stressful situation. My sincere thanks to everyone at Aer Lingus.	1
On my Aer Lingus flight to Chicago I became ill, suffering from motion sickness. The crew on board are so helpful and sweet to me. During the flight, they were constantly checking on me and moved me up to the business class so I can recover. I wanted to thank the Aer Lingus staff from that day! 	1
Flew from Rome FCO to ATH 2 hour flight but had a large selection of drinks lovely meal then tea or coffee after dinner. The staff were charming and helpful no delays at all the check in staff were informative and efficient telling us where to go with our rucksacks (apparently they're awkward shape so go in the 'oversized baggage' section). We were so efficient getting off the plane we beat our luggage to the conveyor belt. Would definitely recommend this airline to anyone.	1
Full flight, left and arrived on time. Did not purchase any refreshments on this short journey.	1
My wife and I flew AeroMexico for the first time this past June. We didn't know what to expect but were extremely pleased. The planes we flew to and from Cancun were new and clean. Screens at every seat. Great service from staff. kicker is that I somehow managed to lose my iPhone on the way back home. I thought it must have been at the Cancun Airport so I called them a few times to check the lost and found. Nothing. Then about three days after my flight I got a call from AeroMexico that they had discovered my phone on the plane. I hadn't even informed them that it was missing because I checked my seat area and was fairly sure that it wasn't there. Honestly I don't even know how they managed to figure out whose phone it was. They may have had to call multiple people in our area of the plane. Anyway I went back to the airport and remarkably, they had my phone. I was relieved and extremely impressed. Needless to say I would highly recommend this airline to anyone flying to/from Mexico. And they are linked to Delta so I believe your points will accrue as Skymiles. 	1
Check-in was fast. Our plane was  comfortable. Each traveler had access to a touchscreen tv. We were able watch movies, tv shows, music videos and listen to music. They also provided croissant sandwich along with snacks and drinks. We arrived on time and without any problems. Thank you Aeromexico for your excellent service.	1
After flying Ryanair for the past 7 years, I found a cheap fare for Aer Lingus, I didn't hesitate to book the flag-carrier for my return leg. Boarding was a shambles to be blunt about it, like cows walking into a barn, just banging into each other and no order of a queue. This was due to handling agents at Venice and not EI crew. The departure was speedy and comfortable, the crew were very smily and friendly upon boarding. The captain have numerous updates throughout the flight about delays and our ETA. Meal service was excellent. Although slow, this didn't matter on the 3 hour flight. The food was so fresh. I could tell the scone was baked recently and the bread on my sandwich was so soft. The best inflight food I've head in a while to be honest. Although it's not free, it is reasonably priced. The approach was very quick and we landed 10 minutes ahead of schedule after departing 20 minutes late which was nice. De boarding was nice and a big farewell from the smiley crew. A very enjoyable flight.	1
Toronto to Varadero, Cuba return with Air Canada rouge. This was our first premium class flight anywhere. Our hostess on flight #1986 on January 24th was rather crusty, but this wasn't going to ruin our experience. The food was excellent, the seats were so comfortable, and it was very quiet in our area. We were given tablets to enjoy movies. On the flight home, #1987 on February 7th, our airline host addressed us by name with a smile and was efficient and friendly. We had the best meal we've ever had on an airplane (chicken with rice and a sauce that was to die for, an arugula and kale salad and a brownie, plus excellent wine), on china with cutlery and a linen napkin. We had warm cashews with a beverage to begin with, and snacks to follow lunch. The cost of this flight was well worth the money. We are so spoiled now that we don't want to go back to economy ever! 	1
I was more worried about the baggage fees than the airline, come to find out that Aeromexico allows 1 carry on and first checked bag for free up to 50 pounds. The plane that we took from Dallas to Mexico City was a nice plane, 2 seater instead of 3, they served us a Ham and Cheese croissant, peanuts, juice, water, beer, liqour, whatever we wanted. Smooth ride, nice landing, made it to Mexico City, from there we took a bigger plane but a little bit older, still a smooth ride and landing. On the way back from Cancun we were in a very nice plane with our own TV, headphones, several movies to choose from. My experience flying with Aeromexico was really good, nothing to complain about.	1
LHR-ATH leg on Aegean Airlines Flight A3601 Economy. Check in with Aegean was a breeze professional and quick. Boarding was efficient and welcomed on board by polite and attentive crew with genuine smiles. Nice to see New Airbus A321 clean outside and spotless interior. Lunch consisted of tasty Greek meatballs with potatoes which was delicious. Greek salad as starter and a nice dessert. Tea and a choice of coffees were available and the usual soft drinks. Cabin crew were very polite and pleasant helpful and offered service with a smile. A Singapore Airlines style service. Return leg ATH-LHR was just as pleasant. Found the whole Aegean experience to be very comfortable with polite attentive crew and good service throughout. Would have no hesitation in using them again.	1
I flew from Geneva to Athens in May 2014. Crew were very polite and welcoming the service was excellent for the price. I was surprised to have a full meal and to receive an alcoholic drink for free for such a low ticket price. I flew back with a low cost airline from Thessaloniki…the ticket was more expensive and of course nothing was offered to eat or drink. I was also surprised to see how fast and easy it is to upgrade in their miles and bonus program. I have already booked my next flight with them.	1
Athens - Brussels - Athens. Nice service friendly staff clean and comfortable seats. Good food on time.	1
I've not had the chance to fly Air Canada for a few years and I am pleased to say the experience was just as good as before with only one letdown. My checked bag did not make it onto the plane! It was however returned to me two days later in Duluth, USA. The flight left on time and arrived on time, both of which are a big plus these days. The seat was very comfortable, the food and service were great and the IFE was good enough.	1
Flight 9100 and 9101 coach seating 4/3 to 4/7/15. I cannot say enough good things about or flight service through Aeromexico. The planes were clean and very comfortable loved having the option of watching a movie TV show or listening to music. The attendants were friendly and took care of us all very well. Lunch boxes were served - that's a pleasant surprise in itself! I was very impressed!	1
Flew from LHR thru MEX to PVR. Was my first time on the Dreamliner. It's a beautiful aircraft and the AeroMexico service and comfort the best I've experienced in long-haul tourist class. Formalities and connection at MEX Term 2 very efficient. Domestic flight to PVR on very comfortable Embraer 190.	1
LHR-ATH-RHO return. First time with Aegean. Extremely pleasant and professional staff excellent planes and comfortable seating. Not cheap but excellent airline.	1
A321 and A320 Kos - Athens / Athens - Vienna May 3 2014. Nice service friendly staff clean and comfortable seats. Simple and useful online check-in.	1
First flight with Aegean Airlines and found it all very relaxing. The staff were friendly and helpful and tried to give the personal touch. From the moment we checked our bags in we found them to be really helpful. I was very nervous about the stay over and catching the next flight from ATH to RHO but they really reassured me and made sure I felt happy. On arrival in ATH they made the change of flight very stress free. Definitely use them again. So much different to Ryanair who were dreadful.	1
Was delayed in Dublin, flight cancelled to Jersey in the end, but put in marvellous hotel, provided 3 course meal and prompt transport back to airport in the morning. Greatful thanks to Aer Lingus and taxi service they provided.	1
Have to give a extra shout out to the Air Canada rouge flight attendants on our adventure with 10 other friends! We were on flight 1774 on January 31st from Toronto to Samaná, Dominican Republic. The attendants were amazing and so friendly, and just kept smiling!They deserve big hugs and pats on the back! Our whole experience was just wonderful for such a large gang! From start to finish very impressive even when a computer clinch happened! Keep up the good work.	1
AM 681. Flew YUL-MEX on a new 737-800 for the second time. Cabin was in great condition. Food service on this flight was much better than on my previous flights with Aeromexico in Clase Premier. Cabin crew were excellent and very professional. The purser knew each of the business class passenger's last names (there were 16 of us) and she was always around to see if she was needed. I fell asleep and she left me a drink and peanuts for when I woke up. Aeromexico staff is usually just OK - they are efficient but are cold and tend to disappear into the galley afterwards. This was not the case in this flight when there was always a flight attendant in the cabin (even in economy class). Great flight overall wish all crews performed this way.	1
I have been using Aeromexico for several years for business travel from Chicago to various locations throughout Mexico. They have multiple direct flights. I have been happy with their service both at the counter at the gate and on the airplane. The planes seem to be maintained well and bathrooms and seating areas are clean. Service is pleasant and professional without trying to be cute during announcements. The food to me just seems to be a little better the service a bit more professional and the areas cleaner than everyone else. Again much of what one views is based on perceptions and a few negative things can color one's view. In my case I see so many small positive things that it has probably colored my view of Aeromexico in a good way.	1
AM 423 Nov 27 2014. AM 422 Dec 2 2014. I have flown from Miami to Mexico and back many times. For several years I made the trip once a month. I have flown on every airline that services Mexico City from Miami. AeroMexico beats them all. Basic friendliness refreshments and snacks prompt departures and arrivals reasonable and competitive fares all without the ubiquitous add-ones and charges of other airlines. I will adjust my schedule to fly this airline every time. This trip was the first in several years and it didn't disappoint. Keep it up I'm a big fan.	1
JFK to CUN 10/8/14 flight 417. Return flight 416 on 10/16/14. Excellent airline. Starting from check in all associates were friendly and helpful. Personal entertainment in the seat backs was perfect. 1st checked bag free is always appreciated. Food was great and also a bonus as it was served at no charge and with smiling associates. Aeromexico is a new favorite airline of mine.	1
I was booked on an evening flight from Santorini to Athens but arrived very late and after closure of the check-in desk. I expected the worst that is to be refused boarding but I was so impressed that the Aegean staff agreed to check me in opened the check-in desk and helped me to join the other boarding passengers very efficiently. Full marks for flexibility without compromising security or delaying the flight and that extra effort made such a difference and saved me from a nightmarish situation of cancelled onward flights and hotel. The flight itself was also very stress-free and the hostesses were polite and friendly. Very nice airline.	1
ATH-MUC in economy in March 2014 economy has the dreaded "slimline" seats that LH started and everyone seems to be following. That said flight crew was pleasant and professional airplane was clean flight landed on time- Aegean even gives you a snack and a drink on this flights. Pleasant experience would recommend.	1
I had a very pleasant experience flying with Aer Lingus. Although the business class is not up to par with most other airlines, it is far from bad and the service was great - Irish hospitality at its best! 	1
I had never flown AeroMexico prior to my first visit to Mexico in October/November 2014. I was impressed that they have a new modern fleet comprising 777s and the 787 Dreamliner. The check in process at the counters in Mexico City was very expedient and friendly. The boarding and departure were timeous. The service onboard for the quick domestic flight to Oaxaca was super friendly and cheerful. I cannot fault this airline. It was a better experience than most domestic airlines I fly in Australia.	1
I really think this airline is sadly overlooked in the US market. I took a chance on them a few years back when United dropped direct flights to places in Mexico I visit and found an airline with great service modern planes and competitive prices. The flight schedules are convenient and the staff I have encountered have been friendly and helpful when I have needed them. Only once have I had a issue due to weather - and they made sure to get me on another flight and while my bags did not make it on the plane they had them secured and waiting for me the next morning. In the past 3 years I have flown with them 10+ times and have no interest in looking elsewhere.	1
Flights from San Antonio to Cuernavaca then back to Atlanta were most pleasant experiences. All the things I like to have happen when flying came together on both flights. Both were on time check in went quickly and smoothly every Aeromexico person I had contact with was professional and friendly and even boarding was quick and efficient. The meals - sandwich and candy bar - was well a sandwich but the bread was fresh and a fun sized Snickers isn't all that bad. This was my second and third flight with Aeromexico and all were very pleasant flights. I caught up on a TV show going down and a movie coming back home. For me the airline did a great job and the fare was very reasonable.	1
Excellent friendly service. Able to fly in and out of Cardiff when other flights were cancelled due to fog. Maybe more expensive than alternatives, but reliable. Preferred airline on the Cardiff-Dublin route.	1
Flight 24. Departed at 11.55pm on Oct 20 and arrived at 12.30pm on Oct 21. Had a very positive experience with my flights to and from Mexico City to Rio de Janeiro in Premiere Class. From the gate agents to the inflight crew the service was excellent. The meals and entertainment was also very good.	1
I had two flights with them in business class MEX-MAD and LHR-MEX. The Madrid flight was in a 777 and the London - Mexico flight was in a new 787. Completely different experience. They have substantially improved their food offering but now the crews have an excellent attitude in the way they treat the clients. The seat in the 777 is outdated as is the entertainment system but the 787 flat bed seat is a great quality seat. I can never sleep on planes and when I went up to the galley for a snack I found the cabin crew to be very friendly.	1
First time flying with Aegean Airlines from FRA to ATH on a Lufthansa codeshare and couldn't be happier. Nice to have inflight infotainment on a short haul flight and not bad food better than Air Canada. No delays on time and cabin crew were nice. Only downside was that there was no seat-back monitors which many airliners are upgrading to and seats are sort of stiff.	1
ATH-ROM-ATH. Great airline with great service and great staff. The trip was perfect despite the bad weather.	1
I have now been flying with Aegean since they took over the Olympic slots at Heathrow. This year on the morning of October 7th Heathrow was fog bound so the flight to Athens was delayed by two hours. This meant missing the evening flight to Mykonos. As soon as I was checking in their staff were most helpful. On arriving at Athens I was put up in Hotel Sofitel everything paid for and caught the flight to Mykonos the following morning. My only thought is that the evening flight to Mykonos is too tight with the London flight around about an hour and needs looking in to. Aegean is an excellent airline as part of my holiday flew with them to Crete as well all flights were full and I look forward to flying with them next October.	1
On a return journey to Dublin from Lanzarote (flight 779) I had fallen unwell 15 minutes post takeoff. The urge to throw-up a feeling not welcomed by most especially not at 30000+ altitude was overwhelming and a sense of unwanted panic set in. Luckily I was accompanied by my boyfriend whom along with the diligent and empathetic flight crew got me back on track for the remainder of the flight. Frequently asking if I was ok or whether I needed anything was a small but oh so grand gesture which made such a positive difference.	1
April 15th flight 108 return 26th Apr flight 105. My mother and I flew from JFK to Dublin and return. We were in economy from JFK to DUB and in Premier class on the return trip. Both were great experiences and on Aer Lingus new A330. The food was excellent in both cabins. We opted for the succulent steal ($18) in Economy and it was delicious. Crew were lovely. On return we were in the new Premier class cabin. The crew the food the service was terrific. You really could not ask for more.	1
Was extremely pleased with the level of friendly professional service we received on two flight segments from Cincinnati OH to Cancun Mexico a few weeks ago. The stewardesses on every one of the four flights were so helpful and willing to please that I was taken back due to the fact that of late stewardesses in general have carried an air of arrogant indifference. The planes were very clean. The schedule was adhered to.	1
My wife and I flew from Rome to Athens and Athens to Paris recently check in was a breeze and both flights were great. No problems at all.	1
We flew from Ireland with our 9 month old baby and I was 29 weeks pregnant the staff were great we had flown to Ireland with a different carrier but because of the lack of facilities for our little one we decided to let our return trip expire and book new flights with Aer Lingus there is nothing bad I can say about this airline they make you feel comfortable and were so good with our little one we were even given a bassinet for him to sleep in. I highly recommend to anyone with small children.	1
Fort Lauderdale to Toronto, and excellent service through Air Canada rouge. Commendation sent to the airline for the pleasant and professional service received by the Flight Attendants on this flight. Thank you to everyone that provided an excellent journey. I will continue to use and endorse Air Canada rouge.	1
Such a great Airline. I am flying Air Canada every other week for work, today, I brought along my wife and daughter, Montreal Airport customs was so long we would miss our flight. I figured I would try to make it to the gate by myself using Nexus and ask to hold the flight for a few minutes. I did, my wife and daughter arrived at the gate 10 minutes later than the flight time but we still made it. Thank you so much Alex from the ground crew who helped us so much and happy birthday! 51 flights and counting this year with Air Canada, this kind of attention keep your clients loyal.	1
AM633 on 21 August SAT-MEX and AM632 on August 25 MEX-SAT. Short trip from SAT to MEX and return on Embraer jet. First time on AM and it was a terrific experience crew were efficient aircraft clean and very well maintained. Snack service was tasty with fresh choices and excellent bar service. I will gladly take AM again as my travel plans permit.	1
We fly Aeromexico JFK to Cancun. We use them whenever we can. The reasons are many but here are some. The crew are very accommodating and always courteous. We enjoy having food to eat. If there is an empty seat after takeoff we were allowed to move. The plane was new.	1
Been flying AM 429 Monday morning flight for about 3 months now and returning on Thursdays flight 422. Very friendly and professional service airplanes are modern and with more leg room than most.	1
We flew from Athens to Rhodes 2 weeks ago fantastic airline short flight had sweets and soft drinks plenty of leg room.	1
I fly LGW-DUB-LGW every fortnight. The crew are always extremely friendly considering it is 06.50am and 20.50 on the return. The service is great and they always smile & welcome everyone on board unlike the other Irish airline. However one major concern from the end of March '15 the 06.50 flight will cease to operate and the first flight of the day to Dublin will be at 09.10 which is useless for those of us going to work in Dublin.	1
My husband and I flew to Mexico City and then to Manzanillo. Staff were friendly and helpful. We encountered no problems with this airline. Our flights ran on schedule and our luggage was not lost. On the return trip I was missing a form at the time of boarding staff quickly helped me fill it out and held the plane for me to run back to the boarding gate. We will use this airline again. We feel like we received good service for the price of our ticket.	1
BRU-ATH ATH-BRU. Jul 20 2013 and Aug 11 2013. Aegean always exceeds expectations. Attentive and courteous cabin crew clean aircraft and comfortable seats. Above and beyond!	1
RHO-ATH-FCO. This should be listed as a 4-star airline. Clean new planes excellent meals featuring Greek items and the most courteous FA's I have encountered in years. A pleasure to fly!	1
Athens to London Heathrow with A321. Very clean aircraft very helpful crew and tasty food. Very nice take off and landing.	1
DUB-JFK - December 2014. Third time flying Business with EI most flights are economy and this was a treat for our wedding anniversary. From Dublin - check in efficient lounge pleasant US immigration took minutes. Boarded first and welcomed with a glass of champagne. Crew chatty and attentive. Lovely meal and a few hours sleep on the near flat beds. I understand this year they will move to fully flat. Arrive in JFK as a domestic passenger so seamless to public transport or a cab. Flying back was excellent too. Slept most of the flight. Crew in good spirits but not as good as the crew out on the 17th (4pm flight). Overall top marks.	1
Newark to Singapore via Beijing with Air China. The planes were fairly new, clean and everything worked. The cabin staff spoke English and were there to serve us. They were extremely helpful and friendly. The food was plentiful and very good. The movies, in both English and Chinese, were current not outdated as some have noted. My only comment is the business class lay-flat seats on the A330 was more comfortable than the seats on the Boeing 777ER. The screens were larger also. We took advantage of the 72-hour transit visa in Beijing and had a wonderful time. Planning to return again in the future. The re-boarding in Beijing for our flight to Singapore was very easy because they have a check-in area for first and business class passengers. We took advantage of the Business Class lounge which had plentiful food and drinks. The return trip from Singapore via Beijing to Newark was even better. Check-in at the Singapore airport is in the first/business class lounge. Transit in Beijing was quick and allowed us to enjoy the Business class lounge again. We were hoping to get the same cabin crew for our trip to Newark but the new crew was just as hospitable and friendly and spoke English. We will surely fly Air China again, and the cost is much less than other airlines flying the same route. 	1
MEX-PVR-MEX-CUN on EMB190 B737-700 and B737-800. EMB190 and B737-800 were new and great B737-700 was old but well kept. First row on economy is great with plenty of leg room. All flights were on time and service was good. They offer only refreshments and alcoholic drinks. Attendants were nice and speak English perfectly. Terminal 2 at MEX is modern and great. Luggage drop and security was very fast. On B737-700 and -800 there was full IFE service with more than 10 movies.	1
JFK-MEX-ZIH and return. JFK-MEX on the red eye was completed on an older model 737 with no inflight entertainment (presumably due to the timing of the flight - depart 12.15am arrive 4.40am) but we were served a very nice hot sandwich shortly after takeoff. MEX-JFK return on a brand-new 737 - great plane excellent inflight entertainment and again a nice hot meal. The ZIH-MEX connection was slightly delayed but we were assured that a significant amount of passengers on the flight were connecting to the JFK flight. Sure enough about 18 of us were greeted by an agent upon deplaning in MEX and were escorted as a group to the JFK gate which was in the process of boarding. Excellent service throughout by both ground and cabin crews. Would not hesitate to recommend Aeromexico in the future.	1
Flew London Heathrow to Athens and back. Great cabin crew very friendly. Food is rather good (for airline food)! Beverage service is excellent. Enjoyed the extra legroom and the leather seats.	1
Larnaca - Rhodes return. Both flights on time comfy seats and friendly cabin crew. No inflight entertainment probably because it was a short flight but a good experience to fly with Aegean.	1
SNN-BOS: I booked the flight on the Aer Lingus website and the cost was very reasonable. Check in was quick and efficient in less than 5 minutes same with security and US Immigration which is a real bonus. The flight was operated by Air Contractors for Aer Lingus 757 which is a smaller aircraft to the traditional A330 Aer lingus used to use on the route. I chose to sit in the back cabin of the aircraft as most people were sitting up at the front and the middle of the aircraft the few of us at the back had a row of three seats each. The seat pitch was fine (and mush better compared to the Qantas A380 which I was on two weeks prior). The pre order meal is well worth the extra money especially for the west bound flight it includes wine and has proper cutlery and is served on porcelain and the meal is served individually before the standard meals. In-flight entertainment was touch screen (there was no remote and the head sets is plugged into the side of the screen) with a good choice of movies: there are some new releases and a good few classic movies with the usual array of sitcoms music and the in-flight map. Crew were friendly and professional throughout the flight chatting with the passengers throughout the service. There was a small snack of a large flapjack with tea or coffee before landing. Overall a good service comfortable aircraft (despite the smaller size of the 757 there was a nice area near the aft restrooms to stretch your legs) good seat pitch (I am 6 ft) and it is well worth upgrading your meal.	1
I often travel with Aer Lingus from Belfast City to Gatwick and have also flown to Portugal with them as well. The flights are always on time staff polite and very helpful. I'm not a fan of flying long or short journeys but I enjoy the experience with Aer Lingus.	1
I am a regular Air Canada flyer and was terrified to fly Air Canada Rouge from YVR to OGG after reading all the reviews. From the time we checked in, Air Canada Rouge exceeded our expectations. The seats were comfortable with more then adequate leg room. The flight was full however it did not feel like it. The cabin crew were kind, helpful and courteous. Beverage service happened twice and with the Air Canada Rouge Cafe buy on board we had an excellent selection of things to purchase. The Air Canada Rouge App had great selection of movies and TV shows. I like that I could use my own personal smartphone and iPad. The cabin offers a standard plug in for devices to keep them charged. Reading other reviews makes me think traveller's did not read about how Air Canada Rouge works with inflight entertainment and services, they expected an Air Canada flight. The airline even emails you to ensure you are aware of the inflight services and entertainment. There are no excusses to complain about it. I would recommend Air Canada Rouge as a discount airline.	1
Flew Istanbul-Athens. Plane was new and clean staff warm and friendly and they served drinks and a sandwich on this 1-hour flight. This airline deserves more than a 3-star ranking in my opinion.	1
I must admit I did not know what to expect having read all the awful reviews about Air Canada Rouge and I am a terrible flier at the best of times so this only added to my feelings of dread, but, I was more than pleasantly surprised to find that the plane and seats were very comfortable and the cabin crew were excellent and very attentive. The food was hot and we were constantly supplied with fresh water and soda throughout the flight. I even managed to sleep for some of the flight, something I never do. Having stopped in Toronto to get a connecting flight to Edmonton I then started to get nervous again about the internal flight as again I had heard and read bad things about these but I need not have worried. The cabin crew were courteous and professional and we were once again supplied with water free of charge throughout the flight. I even managed to get some sleep on this flight too despite it only being 4 hours long. I have read in other reviews where people have said there is nowhere to plug in your charger for laptop or phone, there was charging slots for both of these on both flights, they're under the seat in front. I normally never leave reviews for anything like this but having seen all the negative ones I felt I had to talk about my positive experience. Maybe the old reviews are from old flights and experiences but I genuinely found the whole experience a pleasant one. Will definitely fly with them again.	1
GDL to LAX. It was a very pleasant flight for many reasons. Staff were very friendly and willing to help with any question. The food served was good for a 3 hour flight. They served yoghurt with cookies and fruit. There was inflight entertainment but no option all that there was available is what they played. Overall I really liked this airline and am willing to fly with them in the future.	1
I had an excellent flight from MEX to JFK on New Year's Day on one of their new 787s. Check-in staff was helpful and well-organized. We boarded and left on time. Cabin staff was professional and friendly; the breakfast frittata was great and there was a variety of movies to choose from during the flight. They even offered wine in Economy Class. The 787 is a great plane and flying in this plane was a great experience. We arrived at JFK 30 minutes early.	1
FRA-SKG in Economy operated by Aegean Airlines. Bit fussy boarding at FRA and slightest delay due to late incoming aircraft. Shiny new cabin on A320-200 attentive and welcoming staff. Overhead monitors for safety instructions and a flight show. Brilliant hot meal on 2 hour flight accompanied by appetizer (warm roll/butter/mini crackers/spread cheese) and selection of Greek wines in little bottles (not by glass) a dessert and two rounds of very decent coffee. Smooth landing on time. Absolutely recommended.	1
Flew EI111. Service I will admit was bad. I fly maybe 4 times a year with Aer Lingus on its European network and some people need to remember that we sadly have left the era of luxury air travel like the Great Swissair. Even flag carriers now have to cut costs. What you pay for on Aer Lingus is very cheap for the service compared to another low cost Irish airline.	1
I had a great experience with Aeromexico on a round trip from Las Vegas to Guadalajara. The aircraft was very clean. The loading process was efficient and quick. The flight attendants were very professional and all were bi- lingual. The entire staff of Aeromexico were pleasant and concerned with customer satisfaction.	1
October 16. Business Class Orlando to Dublin and economy class connecting to Amsterdam. It is difficult to fault this airline. The quality and attitude of the flight attendants is remarkable. This was true even on the connecting economy flight to Amsterdam despite the seating being very tight and the flight was packed. Flights departed and left on time. Boarding was more chaotic as patrons waited while families with infants and those in wheelchairs boarded early but brought with them large extended families as well to take advantage of the early boarding. October 25 the return flight from Amsterdam only allows check in with KLM but Aer Lingus passengers find out too late that they cannot print boarding passes from the hotel but only at blue KLM machines in the airport. On return to Orlando in the time it took to walk for the gate to baggage Aer Lingus already had the bags on the conveyor belt. Now that's a first.	1
3/10/14 London Heathrow to Dublin Flight EI155. I am fed up with the Aer Lingus bashing on this site. Whilst conceding that I am Irish and could be accused of bias on the number of occasions over the last few years I have flown with Aer Lingus I can truthfully say that the overall service has been outstanding. Flight delays are usually outside the control of the airline. The crews without exception have been warm friendly and totally professional. I have enjoyed flying with Aer Lingus and look forward to doing so again.	1
Quick check in boarding and departure on time. We had a light dinner. I have travelled with Aegean many times and I think that on SKG-STR route they should improve catering and entertainment. Staff very friendly.	1
We recently flew Aer Lingus from Chicago to Dublin and we can now say that we have a new favorite airline. Flights were on time luggage problems were non-existent and the staff was great.	1
LCA-ATH-MUC. Flight on-time and very pleasant . Cabin crew polite and helpful. Hot breakfast served before we reach Athens and normal meal at the Munich flight. The price a little bit expensive but I would recommend it! As always satisfactory.	1
What a difference a year makes. I wrote a review last year scolding Air Canada rouge over my bad experience. This past trip I was so impressed by some of the changes. Staff were warm and welcoming, new business class seats comfortable, movies current and great selection. Food, keep trying but not bad.	1
This flight was the final leg of our journey from Rome to Honolulu via Munich and Vancouver. All of our flights were delayed, we flew Lufthansa from FCO to MUC, then MUC to YVR. Our final leg from YVR to HNL was with Air Canada. Our flight from MUC to YVR was delayed leaving MUC, and landing at YVR. Going through customs and immigration at YVR was long and frustrating. Looking at the Departure screen our flight AC 519 to HNL was in the final boarding process. I asked the AC agent on duty at the passenger screening what could be done to insure my wife and I didn't miss our flights. She escorted to the head of the line. After going through security, it was then through passport control, then customs, very time consuming due to the large amount of people. By the time we cleared customs, there was an Air Canada agent with a cart to take us to our gate. What a very nice touch. We arrived at gate E80, we were the last people to board, even on the screen our names were displayed for last call. We were able to board the plane thanks to the assistance of the ground and cabin staff. Air Canada's service was remarkable and I can't thank them enough for their service and their going out of their way to get us onboard our flight. The 737max8 is such a quiet, comfortable aircraft, and quite roomy. To all the staff of Air Canada at YVR and to the flight crew aboard AC flight 519, thank you so much for a job well done and for all your assistance.	1
We travelled from the Boston US to Ireland on an emergency trip. We flew on August 21 and returned today Sept. 5. Staff were excellent on both flights. We are traveling again in December and we look forward to much of the same. This was a short notice flight so it was a little pricey.	1
MTY-MEX-PVG-MEX-MTY. Departed MTY Terminal B very nice fast check in. Boarded a brand new 737-800 with IFE in Biz and coach classes. In MEX went to the AM lounge - its excellent. Boarded (777-200ER) sat in Premier Class all the way to PVG. It has a tech stop over TIJ which turned out not so bad you don't even get off the plane at TIJ just crew changes and on we went to Shanghai. It was a 14.45 min flight but sleeping eating movies and great crews made my flight amazing!	1
Athens-Mykonos-Athens. All flights on time very nice looking Airbus 320; good leather seats overhead TV screens and nice cabin crew. They even tried to do some service on those 25 mins flights (sweets and drinks) but on both legs they managed to reach first 6 or 7 rows which is ridiculous in general - nobody expects any service on such a short hop so why bother?	1
As always excellent service professional attitude for both the ground staff in Brussels as well as the people on board on the BRU-CFU flight on 17 August 2012. I am a frequent flyer with more than 30-35 flights per year. Aegean is the top of my preferences for both my professional trips as well as my vacation. This time I flew with my dog and staff on the ground have been extremely helpful in making my trip troubles free. The service on board is much better from the competition in the Belgium-Greece route. There is a good meal as well as free drinks throughout the flight. The airbus was clean and nicely decorated with enough leg space. In a few words: Aegean was an excellent choice.	1
Well what to say a single Business Class flight to JFK from Dublin. Ordinarily I would hate such flights but the price and nature of the Aer Lingus flight was exceptional the cabin crew were dedicated and tended to my every need providing a friendly a fun flight to New York. The seats were very comfortable and I was greeted with champagne upon arrival the inflight entertainment was highly varied with some real classic films as well as many block buster movies and TV shows. The flight departed on time. The only slight drawback currently is the fact the seats do not lie completely flat that being said you still have more than enough room to relax. When I raised this with staff they discussed how their will apparently soon be changes made to put in place those seats that do lie completely flat as other airlines have begun to put them into place. Overall the flight was incredibly relaxing and I would book long haul with Aer Lingus in a heartbeat for flying out of Dublin the service is exceptional and business class was an unforgettable experience.	1
After a glorious vacation ending in Rome, my family consisting of brother-in-law, 2 sister-in-laws and myself, boarded our flight at the Rome Airport. We were very impressed with the care and attention we received. One male attendant in particular was excellent. He was what I can only guess is what Air Canada Rouge must be looking for in all their attendants, friendly, attentive, positive and professional. We can not thank him enough for such a wonderful flight. The food and wine were delicious and we all enjoyed it. I cannot think of very many flights where the service was excellent. All the attendants were wonderful. We all agreed that Air Canada rouge is the way to fly from now on. 	1
From the moment of boarding, the Air Canada rouge crew was upbeat, positive and made you feel valued as a customer. A special mention for the purser, who handled all the responsibilities of her job with panache and lots of personality, and another staff who was a delight to deal with, and went out of her way to make people feel comfortable. I must say, because of the crew that day, it was one of the nicest flights I have been on. 	1
MEX-MIA on a Boeing 737-800. Full flight and despite this the airline manages to board everyone very quickly. The crew of Aeromexico have a very high Uniform standard and are very professional. On this 2.5 hour flight I was offered a complete breakfast drinks including alcoholic drinks newspapers and headphones. Their Hub in Mexico City is definitely the best terminal in North America.	1
SKG to HER. Flight was on time! The plane an A320 Airbus was new and clean inside/out. Cabin crew was pleasant and caring the on board service was good even though the flight was just 1 hour. Seats were comfortable and you have the option to check in online! I have flown many times domestic and abroad and am always satisfied.	1
We had never flown on Air Canada rouge before and did not know what to expect on our flight from Toronto to Athens. We had heard that the crews were relatively new and young and the service was so-so. The flight was about 9.5 hours and it went by quickly, thanks in part to a great happy flight crew. Staff were courteous and very attentive. 	1
London Heathrow to Larnaca. Among the most attentive and pleasant crew I have come across. Clean and new airbus food service was very good. Drink service frequent - around 5 times for a 4.5 hr flight. Overall very welcoming and pleasant.	1
LCA-LHR on a nice clean A321. Aircraft left Larnaca on time cabin crew looked smart and were polite I had paid only £80 for my one way flight value for money was excellent as all drinks and food was included. Although cabin crew only came round I think 3 times on the 5 hour flight drinks were available on request if needed and cabin crew were happy to serve from the galley. In flight meal was average I find catering on all flights from Larnaca not that great! Seat was comfortable and I had plenty of leg room pilot kept us updated on arrival times and the weather back in the UK which is always nice to know you're going to land bang on time. Despite the bad weather in London landing was probably the smoothest I've ever had on a flight didn't know I had touched the ground! Just wish A3 didn't fly into Terminal 1 at LHR as its not that great and is rather run down other than that Aegean cannot be faulted. A great little airline and I will definitely fly with them again to Greece or Cyprus!	1
Flew Aegean to Santorini late June. Short and sweet flight. Cabin crew were professional and aircraft very clean. There was no food and inflight entertainment because of short flight nice gesture providing passengers with a light refreshment.	1
ATH - LHR sector on new Airbus A320. Very clean inside and out. Flight departed on time with pre-take off drinks in Business. Comfortable blue leather seats with the middle seat free allowing more room. Attractive and attentive crew service with a smile and very polite. Dinner was a choice from a menu which was plentiful and delicious with a good selection of Greek wines to accompany the meal. Headsets given out and a film shown during the flight. Regular water service throughout with pretzels and snacks. Excellent business product and would definitely use Aegean again.	1
I use to fly with Ryanair back and forth from Dublin every few weeks. After Ryanair changed their flight times to Dublin which did not help me I changed to Aer Lingus. The staff are friendly and always smiling the planes are comfortable and the times of the flights are fantastic. The prices are always a little higher than the other company's but I would not change back.	1
I would like to take this opportunity to compliment the inflight staff of Air Canada rouge flight AC1934 on August 31st, from Montreal to Athens. In particular, we were impressed by the professional yet friendly service we received from two cabin staff members. A big "shout out" to them both, and thanks for making a long overseas flight enjoyable!	1
My husband and I were delayed in Guadalajara by 1.25 hours because of engine problems which meant we would miss our connection in Puerta Vallarta to Calgary with WestJet. Aeromexico ground staff in Guad made it possible for us to catch our connecting flight. We were met in P.V. on the tarmac and were personally escorted through the airport rushed through immigration phone calls were made to ensure that our luggage had been transferred and we made it onto the WestJet flight with only 5 minutes to spare. We had a hotel and rental car booked and paid for in Calgary so we had to get there and we did.	1
CDG to ATH. Great experience. Hot dinner was served entertainment was available (which is not the case on the competing companies on that route). Flight on time. Staff was very friendly and professional.	1
Went from SKG to STR and after a week the other way around. My flights were A3510 and A3511. Excellent aircraft clean no malfunctioning seats inflight maps 2 captain announcements one the standard and one extra that we would experience some turbulence over Belgrade. Star-Alliance stylished meals served hot enough beverage and coffee happy to help flight attendants ultra-fast baggage drop-off and mobile check- in. I didn't even have to print my boarding pass. Highly recommended!	1
LGW-BHD EI021 31 July 14. Excellent customer service and particularly impressed with clear communication and politeness of cabin manager on this flight. A320 seats much more comfortable than the A319s that EI also operate on this route.	1
I have flown 4 Aeromexico flights in the past 6 months two roundtrips from Mexico City to Chicago and all 4 flights were excellent. One flight left 30 minutes late yet managed to arrive on time. The others left on time and arrived either on time or early. Newspapers and either breakfast or a light lunch onboard. Very friendly flight crews. No problems at all.	1
TLV-HER and back. It was a charter flight so I expected a bad experience but was pleasantly surprised. We left on time. The A320 was new and clean. The cabin crew were very helpful and nice. Very informative announcements by the captain. Good leg space.	1
Dublin to San Francisco return. Outward journey via Boston (second leg with Jetblue which was great) as the direct flight was sold out for days around my date of travel. Thankfully got one of the last seats on the direct flight on the return journey. Business class wasn't in the budget for this trip but the seats in economy were fine (I'm 6'0'' tall). I ordered one of the special meals for the Boston flight which was well worth it had the regular meal from SFO to DUB which was fine and you could help yourself to drinks and snacks from the galley at any time. The service is consistent the aircraft's always immaculate the personal entertainment has plenty of choice and the staff generally very friendly and helpful. You can select most seats on the aircraft for free at time of booking. Lets hope AL go daily on this route in 2015.	1
Have taken Aer Lingus from the US (Chicago and NY) several times and am very impressed. The planes are new the seats reasonably comfortable (good leg room and we are tall people) the food fine and good selections on the personal TV/Movie screens. No problems with being on time staff was friendly and efficient. I was especially impressed when we got into Dublin a bit late and were personally escorted through the lines in order to make our connection on to Paris. Never had that happen with any airline before! I would fly Aer Lingus again.	1
London to Halifax. After reading all the reviews on Air Canada we were apprehensive about out our trip from Heathrow to Halifax, Nova Scotia on 4 July. We encountered a few problems at security Heathrow which caused a few issues before boarding which was nothing to do with Air Canada. We were greeted by the crew in a professional manner and welcomed on board. Service throughout the flight was friendly and professional. The food was excellent and seat comfortable. A good selection of inflight entertainment. Special thanks to the Service Director on this flight who looked after us. I will certainly use Air Canada again.	1
MEX-MAD. Flight left on time. Aircraft was a Boeing 777-200 in a very good condition. Cabin looked spacious and clean. Seat was ok but sleeping was not easy as it was angled. Moreover the config was 2-3-2 so if sat in the middle and pax next to you are asleep you have to jump over them. AVOD system was reliable. The food was tasty as Aeromexico have started a new collaboration with a group of chefs. There was also an express dining option for those of us who wanted to sleep. The crew were attentive and helpful with high uniform standards. They responded effectively to customer needs and were constantly through the cabin offering drinks and top ups. Two hours before landing breakfast was served. Flight landed in MAD on time. Great flight and exceeded expectations.	1
MAD-MEX Economy class. Check in was a bit disorganized in Terminal 1 of Madrid. Terminal was very busy due to the summer holidays no sitting at the gate Terminal 1 has very poor services for travellers. Boarding was on time and done in a very organized way. Legroom was reasonable food was very nice and service was outstanding. Cabin crews were very polite and caring. Landing on time. Baggage came with 15 mins delay due to a shortage in transporting vehicles.	1
Flew from JFK to Shannon then Heathrow on June 7/8 then from Gatwick to Dublin to JFK on June 22. My husband is a retired Air Traffic Controller and said we were flying Aer Lingus or Icelandair only so we flew Aer Lingus. Loved it! The stewards were very nice and the crew were funny even in announcements. We did not upgrade the meal but they were great except on the way back I asked for the beef dish and she gave me the chicken which had curry and I can't eat curry. After finally getting her to stop and listen they were out of beef. I slept most the way anyway.	1
Heathrow to Larnaca return in October 2011. Excellent in every respect - new clean aircraft relaxed and attentive service.	1
Staff excellent customer service oriented meals are good and the planes are new. The seats are comfortable and lounge in Athens has a smoking area that is not packed.	1
I flew business class to Ireland for my vacation and I can say it was the best flight. It was all I thought it would be on Aer Lingus. The business class seating and all you get is worth the value in all areas. The service from the crew was great always seeing if you needed something if you were doing ok and keeping you updated.	1
Boston to Shannon March 9 (E10134). Shannon to Boston on March 18 2014 (E10135). I have been flying with Aer Lingus since I was a child and am never disappointed with the food service and hospitality offered. The planes are well kept and clean. The crew were so attentive - they define Irish hospitality.	1
LHR-ATH-LHR. Super Flight great crew I was even offered a chance to see the captain. Great movie and lovely food good choice of duty free items lounge was comfortable.	1
LHR-ATH-JMK. Bags were transferred seamlessly at Athens which was my main concern. LHR-ATH flight was smooth cabin lighting could have been dimmed with one meal/trolley service for the flight food was served quickly however and the cabin crew were extremely friendly. ATH-JMK was the quickest flight I've ever done and by the time they handed out the drinks they were grabbing them back for landing. Overall a pleasant flying experience helped by the open selection on booking seats (I got exit rows) and the ability to check in 48 hrs before. My one criticism is when doing cabin announcements they speak English so quickly that you do not always hear/understand what is being said.	1
Professional service. There was a delay of 1 hour from Crete to Athens however we received a voucher for a free domestic flight.	1
Flew with Aer Lingus to Boston on flight EI 139. Economy. Flew on the A330 to and from. Excellent plane. The cabin crew were very helpful and friendly. The meal on the plane going over was excellent it was off their new sky menu. I got the steak it was lovely. It was first class dining in economy class. It was well worth the €17.50 because that included a glass of wine. I would recommend getting this. Unfortunately I couldn't get this meal on the way back sold out. However the meal we got was still lovely. Overall would like to fly with Aer Lingus in the future again. Would recommend them.	1
I didn't like that they changed the type of plane that I had booked, seems to be that this is normal. Anyway I was impressed with the comfort of the seats, the food, the internet and the service. 	1
This was my return flight from Las Vegas to Toronto on August 10, 2015. Flight 1854. I have a severe anaphylactic peanut/nut allergy. Just over a week before I travelled, I contacted Air Canada to inform them. Upon baggage check-in and gate check-in I also informed the airline. As I entered the aircraft I informed one of the flight crew. The main question that was asked of me at each check-point was do I carry an epipen and if so how many. This crew, as well as the crew travelling to Las Vegas on Flight 1853 (Toronto to Las Vegas) on August 5, 2015, did an excellent job. The crew on the first flight did assure me that even though they usually provide peanuts to the first class/business class cabin, that they would not be serving those at all on this flight. A member of the flight crew on this first flight did approached me and the rows behind, next to and in front of me about a peanut-free zone. The crew on the second flight made a cabin announcement as part of their safety demonstration that they would not be serving peanuts/nuts on this flight and that one passenger has a severe allergy and that the passengers should refrain from consuming any such food. This was the first flights in a long time that my allergy was treated with respect and professionalism. I took the advantage of boarding the flights early to wipe down my seat and tray table and to set up my area with a blanket, but that is a great feature and something that I will request upon further travel.	1
I fly around 10 times each year to domestic and European destinations Aegean is my preferred airline for many years now I never had a problem except once where there was a delay of 1hr but they issued a free ticket for me and my wife so I can't complain. Aircraft's always clean stuff friendly and kind. They are a top airline with very good service.	1
SKG-STR A320. Everything worked well despite air traffic control strikes in Greece. It was anyway one of the best medium-haul flights. Online-Check-In efficient baggage-drop-off at the counter - no queues. We had to leave Thessalonika before 6pm because of the strikes. Plane arrived late so they really did a good job to turn the plane around in 20 mins. Cabin clean proper looking. Comfortable seating. Great service with a warm meal and a wide choice of beverages. Staff unbelievably friendly and helpful. Arrived on time. Great!	1
I myself am a frequent flyer. I live in Paris but my family lives in Cork. Aer Lingus is the only airline to offer a direct link to Cork from Paris. The staff always have a smile when you travel. Food is nice their is no In flight entertainment screens but its OK for a 1 hr 40min flight.	1
I have travelled with various airlines out of Dublin in the past haven taken a break from Aer Lingus. However recently I flew with them to Munich and have to say I was very impressed overall with the service. I checked in on my mobile presented my boarding card on my mobile and had no problems using it getting through security. The aircraft was an A320 I was seated at row 12a which was an emergency exit so I had plenty of leg room on way out. Food was of good quality although I would have liked even a complimentary tea or coffee instead of 2.50 but only a small negative. On my return home the journey was a little more eventful which ended with me collapsing in the middle of the cabin. I can not commend the cabin crew enough for looking after me and administering the necessary first aid etc to ensure I was safe and comfortable. The crew were professional calm and reassuring which now looking back on it is what some other airlines are missing. I will definitely be a convert back to Aer Lingus.	1
Staff at airport and staff on plane all very professional great seats comfortable plenty of leg room and food lovely. I travelled with my 3 grandchildren from Dublin - Madrid return and found it a very enjoyable experience. Staff were lovely had great patience with customers. Only downside was Dublin airport had no facilities for children only the play area at Burger King which my children were too big for.	1
I am a Montreal resident and I have been hearing a lot of complaints about the airline on the internet but I found these issues to be isolated at best and should not reflect the overall service given. I flew premium economy and in terms of value vs experience it was a very enjoyable flight. Seat Pitch was comfortable at 37 inches and the recline was good. They gave me two choices on the menu for supper and it was very tasty considering it's airline food. Contrary to what I heard for the on board entertainment, some of the releases were fairly new. The service offered was professional and courteous. My needs as a customer were met. Priority boarding was a nice feature. I really like that part. The flights were on time and boarding was quick. For all those who are booking with this airline, I would suggest going Premium Rouge for long flights.	1
London Heathrow - Larnaca. I found Aegean's price reasonable and A320 was very comfortable. The crew were happy to help and free meals were included which was nice. Great that Heathrow Terminal 4 is used too. Cannot fault.	1
Have travelled with Aegean a number of times already and service is impeccable. Ground crew eager to help and facilitate flights on time comfortable journeys with nice meals on board.	1
MXP-ATH in Economy class. Excellent onboard service and some of the best airline meals. The flight attendants were nice and professionally handled a medical emergency right after landing.	1
Have made several flights with Aegean Airlines in the past year. It was very good value for money. Flights mostly on time inflight service exceptional and friendly FA's. Helpful ground staff. Overall this will be my preferred carrier to Greece.	1
CDG TO ATH. Very pleasant flight on time new A320 film with french translation earphone was free. Food hot and excellent. Crew were helpful. Very nice experience.	1
This airline was very helpful during a very difficult time. They did not deliberately increase their prices during the mad panic caused by the bad weather in Europe in the days before Christmas. My original booking to travel London to Athens was with KLM and then I was passed to Air France. Neither of them could organize things properly and after endless problems it took them 4 days to get me only as far as Paris with no hope of leaving for at least a day. Aegean came to my rescue and even though they also took off late they made sure I did not miss my next flight with them to a Greek island. During this 4 day nightmare I had to rebook my domestic flight several times with Aegean and they were very accommodating.	1
Istanbul to Athens - the best flight with the most courteous flight attendants I have flown in the past 20 years. Keep up the excellent service.	1
Our flight from Belfast to Malaga was cancelled on the 8/4/2014 reasons unknown and we were moved to the 9th. This was unsuitable so I called the customer services and without any hassle we were moved to a flight departing Dublin for the original date. When we checked in via the self check in machine our pre booked seats had changed and when mentioned to the desk staff they quickly corrected our seats back to the original with a sincere apology. The morning flight was on an A330 the advantage to this was we had IFE for the short 3 hour flight but it was a welcomed bonus. Crew were friendly and accommodating to any request and seemed to enjoyed serving the customers with a smile even when it was a full flight. This was a faultless flight in every respect arriving at destination bang on time. I really can't fault this airline every single employee I had connect with either from the call center to the gate agents to the cabin crew made us feel welcomed. It is a shame that the return flight from Malaga to Belfast left to early for us otherwise I would have made this a return trip.	1
MUC-ATH. The seating was standard European Business with the middle seat blocked. The highlight of the flight was the meal which was a pasta dish with shrimp calamari and tomato sauce - simply excellent. Friendly crew and good service as well as the meal.	1
CWL-DUB and DUB-CWL flight EI3291 29/10/13. Outbound - The flight attendants always had a smile and were very helpful throughout. The only negative thing about the outbound flight was that there was a mother that did nothing but shout at her kids from the moment we took off until the moment we landed and when your flight is at 8.30 in the morning it's the last thing you want. Inbound flight DUB-CWL flight EI3298 31/10/13 - we left Dublin later than scheduled due to the fact there was a technical fault with a light in the cockpit and could not take off until it was solved. Within minutes engineers were onboard and both the captain and flight attendants kept us up to date with what was going on and reassuring us that everything was going well. The flight attendants on the inbound flight were much friendlier and talkative which is a great thing to have on an airline. Even though our flight departed late we landed just 5 minutes later than scheduled. I have recommended this airline to family and friends and actually me and a friend have booked to go back to Ireland with Aer Lingus on the new BRS-SNN route in April! Looking forward to it!	1
Paris-Cork EI821 Dec 23 return Cork-CDG Dec 30. I travelled with Aer Lingus over Christmas/New Year. Very busy. Staff were very pleasant and unlike another airline on this route treating passengers with respect or weren't out-to-get me because I had a shopping bag with my carry-on coming on board. The staff make this airline very pleasant.	1
The reviews for Air Canada Rouge weren't good, so was a bit apprehensive when heading home on a Rouge flight (Rouge was the only option for the Dublin to Toronto return flight). We flew Economy (Dublin-Toronto) and it was a great flight. The flight attendants were friendly and smartly dressed. The interior cabin fabric seemed new. The seats weren't too roomy but they didn't feel too small either. The meals were standard fare for my family, decent, although my vegetarian meal (an Indian vegan dish) had to be the best meal I've ever had on any Economy flight, domestic or international. We were pretty much on-time departing and arriving. The in-flight entertainment was a bit laughable, but we had read up on it and knew that going in. It was funny to see such old Hollywood movies available on the Rouge Player (one of the movies was Never Ending Story!). I am a big fan of world movies and some of the world movies were the same as the ones on the Air Canada flight we took to London when we left on our vacation. Our family would definitely try another flight with Rouge again.	1
We have become regular business class passengers on Aer Lingus & they never fail to impress. This time we flew from Dublin to Orlando on EI 121 and returned from New York on EI 104. On both flights the service was quite outstanding. The crew are friendly but professional and the food and wine selections were of high end restaurant quality. Given our experience with other carriers business class usually at much higher fares the Aer Lingus product has to be one of the best available. We only wish they would once again provide a premium offering on European routes.	1
11/11/2013 my companion and I flew from San Antonio to Chicago and there caught Aer Lingus Flight EI124. The Aircraft was an Airbus 330. The Senior Crew Flight attendant was a very compassionate woman who attended to us and all of those around us with interest and tenacity. The seats we paid $50 extra were extra leg room (perfect) the seat itself for me (I have a 44" waist was tight but tolerable). The food was very good (Lasagne) and the later sandwich (ham and cheese) was also very good and unexpected. Great flight. The return trip on 11/18/2013 Flight EI125 we thought OK now we'll see how it is in comparison. The Male Flight Attendant and also Senior Crew member was great as well. We had the same seats on the opposite side of the cabin. The amenities of even economy class on this Airline are excellent and a great value. The equipment is first class and the crew made me proud to be Irish American.	1
I was very pleased by service received at all stages of travel. Well-organised boarding, very friendly stewards, and a smooth flight. Stewards went an extra mile to make a rather lengthy flight comfortable and enjoyable. They seemed to enjoy their work too. 	1
Best experience I have had flying transatlantic. Flew round trip MCO-DUB 10/22 and returned 10/31. Continuing service to CDG. Very friendly and ever present staff on the transatlantic portion. The seat turned into an almost lay flat bed which provided a sound sleep in both directions. Wines were well chosen and poured frequently. Meals were well presented with a variety of appetizers before and hot breads during dinner. The staff service and the overall cleanliness of the plane convinced me that I had made the right choice for an airline. The connection DUB-CDG was a packed economy flight. For an hour and a half flight it was tolerable. Aer Lingus competes with Ryanair on this route so everything including water is for sale. My choice from now on for transatlantic flights. Clearing customs and immigration in Dublin is a real plus. American customs and immigration are rude and hostile but about what you would expect from them.	1
I had 3 trips on Air China, from Beijing to Xi'an and Harbin to Beijing. Both flights were excellent, comfortable seats, good service and clean. I had 3 flights on China Eastern in the same time. By comparison Air China flights were better in every measure. They transport the first class passengers from the plane to the luggage area - this is a nice feature. The Air China lounges are far superior.	1
JFK-DUB EI108 Nov 1st. Another more or less faultless flight with Aer Lingus across the pond. Young cabin crew who were enthusiastic smiling and charismatic. Very attentive to all passengers on a late night flight from New York to Dublin. Pilots again very informative on routing weather and arrival time which is great. Crew apologetic for delay leaving JFK but flight still arrived 55 mins ahead of schedule. Added bonus was the fact that the crew played some great modern music while taxiing to stand after arrival. One minor criticism was the pace of check- in/bag-drop. Great job all round.	1
Dublin - New York Oct 26th: Early start for flight to NYC on EI105 "St. Patrick". Booked flight 6mts in advance for a hugely competitive £440 return. Major plus is clearing U.S. Immigration and Customs at T2 and hassle-free seamless arrival at T5 at JFK. Aircraft spotlessly clean new and unworn. Entered fleet in 2010 only. PTV screens were great with excellent documentaries although choice of good movies limited. Staff professional and efficient. Pilot is provided plenty of weather and routing information. Chose the pre-ordered chicken meal which I would highly recommend doing. Head and shoulders above the standard economy meal. Overall an excellent flight and experience. Could in no way fault.	1
AC1906, 27 May. AC1919, 7 Jun. We just had two great flight Toronto to Venice - Venice to Montreal.  Service was excellent - Cabin crew were jovial and attentive. I will tell you to buy the preferred seating upgrade - it will make the difference as the regular seats are close.  Don't forget to bring your Tablet and load the app for Apple or Android.  I was pleasantly surprised as I had only read negative reviews.  The food was plentiful and tasty on the flights.	1
DUB to MAN one way. Very early flight but crew very friendly and helpful. Left on time but slight delay landing in Manchester due to fog. Pilot informative about weather throughout the flight. Flight very smooth with comfortable seating. Fly often with Aer Lingus and would highly recommend.	1
We flew Boston to Dublin and back. Flight 136 Sep 15 2013. Flight 137 Sep 27 2013. Excellent flights excellent crew! Aer Lingus will be our airline for overseas travel. Highly recommended.	1
MAN-MCO Business Class Sep 2013. One cannot praise Aer Lingus enough the flights were excellent as were the meals on board. Aircraft's were spotlessly clean and good service from start to finish. The only draw back was that we could not find lounge at MCO as it was United's in another part of airport.	1
MAN-SNN SNN-JFK JFK-DUB DUB-MAN. Got a great deal on the ticket price very comfortable A330 planes on the long haul segments with seat-back IFE with a great selection of movies and music very helpful and friendly crew and decent food/drink selection. All sectors were on time and transfers at SNN and DUB were fast and easy. In addition to the excellent all round service there are two major advantages to using Aer Lingus for transatlantic travel: Pre-clearance is available for all USA bound flights out of SNN and I believe selected flights out of DUB hence you arrive as a domestic passenger in the USA and walk straight out of the airport - the pre-clearance facilities in Shannon at least have virtually no queues and you can get through them in a matter of minutes so I suspect that even accounting for the layover time it is as quick as flying directly. Secondly Aer Lingus use T5 at JFK which is a marvellous Terminal loads of space seats eating and drinking options and really fast efficient (and surprisingly friendly) security - I believe that T5 is exception at JFK in this regard. All in all I would very highly recommend Aer Lingus for transatlantic travel to anyone.	1
Had a wonderful experience flying Aer Lingus from Boston to Dublin and from Dublin to Chicago. Both trips were effortless and the customer service was top notch. Everyone was friendly and helpful. I also flew this airline between Dublin and Paris and had a positive experience as well.	1
Excellent flight on Aer Lingus from BOS-CDG clean comfortable aircraft staffed by the best cabin attendants on all segments. Very easy connections at DUB. Aer Lingus is my transatlantic airline of choice.	1
Recently flew from Boston to Shannon (EI-134) on board a very comforting Airbus A330 wide body. On boarding the aircraft at Boston Logan Airport for our flight we were greeted by a very welcoming flight crew. The aircraft was well maintained and very clean. As soon as we departed Boston beverage service was served. Complimentary soft drinks served but alcohol was not free which is ok. Dinner service began about 1 hour after departing and we were served chicken or beef. The meal service was delicious. Flight crew came around during dinner service with more beverages and water. More food available if we desired. Entertainment was excellent plenty of choices for movies. I have to say Aer Lingus is a wonderful airline with great service.	1
We booked a family Hawaiian vacation with our two kids aged 8 and 10 I chose the Air Canada Rouge because of the price. We chose to upgrade to premium Rouge seating for an additional fee of $400 round trip. We flew AC1831 May 6 to Honolulu - Boeing 767. Coming from Edmonton and connecting in Vancouver all flights were on time the cabin staff were vibrant and friendly. The seating while not luxurious was within means of comfort (my husband is 6 ft and I 5' 5") and was larger than our previous flight to Hawaii with another airline in February. The aircraft was clean as were the bathrooms. There was an oversize bathroom on our aircraft which was good for parents with young kids or larger people that I had not seen on other aircraft's. The rental for ipads at $10 was a real treat for my kids - kept our kids busy the entire flight. Though we did not purchase meals on board the food that was for purchase was reasonably priced and looked nice. All of our flights arrived on time. The aircraft was a bit on the cool side however this seems to be common among all airlines. Additionally I would have preferred the cabin lights be dimmed during the entire flight at night for sleep purposes since we were flying overnight. Rouge afforded us very good value and service.	1
Having flown several times with Aer Lingus decided to upgrade to their Business Class cabin from Manchester to Chicago via Dublin. Flight transfer is very easy to navigate in Dublin and on this flight you actually pre-clear US customs in Dublin which is an added bonus. Business Class cabin extremely spacious on the A330 and you are warmly greeted with a nice amenity kit bottled water and champagne. Business Class dining is superb and well worth the upgrade cost in itself with a good choice of entrees. Service includes hot canapés salad and main cheese and biscuits together with a choice of desserts. You won't go hungry! Cabin crew are attentive and if you require extra refreshments you only have to ask. On return to Dublin you also get continental breakfast. Seats are comfortable and fully adjustable to how you want. There are extra buttons in the arm rest which allows you to individually control different parts of the seat including massage. IFE good although they seemed to have dimmed the brightness of the screen recently so you may need to close the window blind to watch. Overall great experience and have already booked Business Class for my next trip to Boston in October.	1
I am a single mother with a 20 month old child. This was my first experience flying alone with my daughter. I have nothing but great things to say about air Canada. From the moment I walked into the airport with a stroller a suitcase a car seat and carry on luggage. A gentleman ran over to help me immediately. He completed my check in and tagged up all my items. He carried my suitcase to the belt, bagged up my car seat, and gave me directions to the security section. I couldn’t thank him enough and all whilst he was rushing around to help me he took the time to interact with my daughter. The cabin crew were amazing, constantly asking if myself or my daughter needed anything. I again received almost the exact treatment at the Winnipeg airport when returning home to Ottawa. Very impressed with the help I received without asking anyone. Thankyou Air Canada this was a very stress free trip and I will travel alone with my child again.	1
Have flown Aer Lingus nearly every year. Every flight I have flown is excellent. My most recent was from Milan Linate to Dublin. Flight was on time and all went smooth with luggage etc. All members of staff were helpful and accommodating. Food was good for aeroplane standard and was reasonably priced for being on a plane. Seats and leg space are excellent for economy class. I am once again flying with Aer Lingus in 2 weeks time to Lisbon from the excellent Dublin airport terminal 2. It is a brand new terminal. A great value airline.	1
London Heathrow - ORK. Fly regularly on this route - such a great alternative to other low cost airlines. Flight took off from London early and arrived early and same for the return. Cabin crew friendly and attentive throughout the flight. Food for purchase was good value and tasty. I have flown over 20 times with Aer Lingus and never had a bad experience. Assigned seating comfortable seats and great crew - makes flying a breeze.	1
BHX-DUB day return 15 June 2013. As a fearful flyer trying to overcome it this was a pair of practice flights for me. Flight attendants could not have been more helpful and supportive especially as they are really busy on short flight. A320s were great and though it was a gusty crosswind day for landings never felt anything but safe and supported. One attendant even provided me with some extra reading material in case I needed it to help distract me and even bought me a drink from the trolley! Was not expecting such above and beyond service. Do airlines realise how much of a good impression caring cabin crew give? Will definitely be flying with this airline again!	1
Flight 982 NY to Beijing Oct 5th. Flight 4118 Beijing to Chengdu Oct 5th. Return Flight 1426 Chengdu to Beijing Oct 18th. Flight 989 Beijing to NY Oct 19th. 2nd time I have used Air China. Considering the length of the flight NY to PEK  it was comfortable and staff was very friendly. Plane was clean and food was quite good.	1
We flew with Air Canada Rouge April 24th and May 1st 2015. We travelled from Toronto to Curacao (return trip). Both flights were excellent and smooth. Best landing I have ever experienced! Flight crew were very professional and helpful to all peoples' needs. I strongly recommend and will fly with this airline again.	1
April 2nd 2013 Economy. BHX-DUB. This was my seventh flight with Aer Lingus and again they didn't disappoint. The cabin crew were excellent very friendly helpful and caring. The aircraft was an A320 and was clean and smart with the seats having good legroom and comfort. The flight was slightly late but the Captain was very informative and gave full route details. I can't comment on the food and beverages as I had none. Overall this flight was very comfortable.	1
Flew Tokyo to Beijing and Beijing to Singapore and back. Nice flights all round. The aircraft's were comfortable and clean. Service was efficient particularly the ground staff who guided us very nicely through a short transit time. We had excellent service on the Singapore to Beijing portion but the Chinese foreign minister was on the same flight. Otherwise the service was efficient and the food was very presentable without being spectacular. Seat was fantastic and the full flat seats a joy to use. However I would recommend their business class as being a reliable comfortable product. A bit more work and it would be truly spectacular.	1
Sep 19 2014 Flight 982 New York to Beijing. Flight 179 Beijing to Manila returned on Sep 27 2014 flight 180 Manila to Beijing. Then flight 817 Beijing to Washington DC. My first time on Air China I was very pleased with everything flight was on time the crew very attentive to the passengers. I had 4 meals on my flight all were very good. I will be flying Air China now for all my international flights.	1
On the Dublin to Chicago flight on the Friday returning Tuesday late afternoon. Nothing bad at all outbound on time departure and arrival flight crew were excellent ordered the "Extra " menu for Euro and it was worth every penny. Flight back you cannot order the extra menu which is a great shame again the flight crew were open friendly and very professional - flight left late and arrived very early. Couldn't fault them at all - spot on. Well done to Aer Lingus.	1
April 27 2013 we took an A330 Airbus from Dublin to Orlando direct. The food was the best I have had on an airline. All flight attendants were cheerful and courteous. The only complaint is that at Dublin airport our boarding passes stated that the gate closed at 10.55 am even though our flight did not leave until 12.40 pm. I do not appreciate being given misleading information like that even if the airline is only doing it to get the slackers to show up on time. I say leave them a couple of times when they are late and they will learn to be on time and not cause the rest of us to show up at the gate only to sit for almost two more hours after already spending two hours going through security and customs! Also the seat cushions on the plane are getting too compressed to have a comfortable trip lasting 9 hours. The seat cushions should be replaced with new ones.	1
JFK-SNN-JFK. Excellent flights in both directions. Cabin crew very professional and attentive. Found the check-in process at JFK terminal 5 with JetBlue staff to be extremely slow. Check-in at Shannon was excellent and very efficient. Clearing USA customs in Shannon saved a lot of time and aggravation that I have experienced coming in from other European countries.	1
SYD to PEK then PEK to LHR Airbus 330-200 second 777-300. After reading so many negative reviews my expectations were very low and I was dreading the experience as I had never flew business class before apart from Jetstar business. Having said this we were pleasantly surprised at the service food and the cabin. Both flights were without a doubt the best trip I've had. Comfortable beds totally lie flat in Airbus around 30 in business class so it was extremely quiet and personal. Toilets were always clean FA were attentive whilst they may have had difficult in speaking fluent English we got by. Inflight entertainment was the only drawback in terms of selection not up to date movies but nonetheless there was something you could see. As this was a night trip I enjoyed the sleeping arrangement more. We had a layover in Beijing to break the trip. The other leg to London plane was newer and business class had about 80 people so I think the attentiveness from FA was a little less but that's understandable again food bed and toilets were great. I wouldn't hesitate in recommending Air China I would certainly fly with them again.	1
I travelled from Dublin to Boston and Boston to Dublin (23-26 April 2013). I have been positively surprised. Pretty new A330-202 good entertainment good food. The only weak point was the readiness of the staff in Dublin to solve a problem with ESTA Visa. Fortunately I was able to find a helpful person at Aer Lingus at the end.	1
Dublin - Santiago return. Both flights on time. Excellent service from Irish cabin crew. Food for purchase but reasonably priced and tasty. Only complaint was lack of staff at passport control in Dublin so long queues. Cant understand. Felt sorry for All non EU passport holders. Not Aer Lingus fault but only glitch in otherwise faultless travel experience.	1
Flew AC Rogue from Toronto to HNL round trip first of April 2015. The flight was as good as any I have been on in the US (we are from the US) and otherwise. The seats were fine the food for purchase good the crew attentive and the service overall good to great. Infight entertainment worked just fine and btw there were pillows and blankets on every seat. Bathrooms fully operational and clean. I will fly Rogue anytime. The service is good and should take advantage of the prices. The price alone beat any of my US options by 300.00 pp.	1
AC1825 27/28 Mar Las Vegas - Toronto. Very professional. For a low cost airline the service was out standing I was seated in the front cabin and the flight attendants where as good as I've had on any airline and better than most. They had enthusiasm.	1
DUB-MCO-DUB. Efficient check-in with added bonus of fast track security in Dublin. Good lounge experience particularly in Dublin. Recaro seats very comfortable. Food quality very good and quality wines served. Staff attentive without being intrusive. A very comfortable way to cross the Atlantic.	1
Cork to Malaga and satisfied with all aspects of the flight. On time comfortable pleasant crew good food and excellent value for money. I usually fly Ryanair from Shannon - who possess none of the above qualities - except blowing trumpets on arrival. For me to use Aer Lingus to travel to Spain means an extra 60 mile road trip which I am happy to take.	1
Took Air China for the first time on my first trip to China - from LAX to PEK on Jun 21 and PEK to IAD on Jul 10. Based on some negative reviews on this and other sites I was a bit worried about spending 12-14 hours on an old plane with lousy service bad food and non-English speaking staff. My expectations were completely shattered: our plane was the latest Airbus model seats were very comfortable the flight attendants very attentive and polite all spoke English and the movie selection was just fine. First time travelers to China are well advised to choose Air China. Moreover the passport and custom controls at Beijing Airport beat almost any US and European standards in terms of ease and friendliness.	1
Boston to Dublin onboard an Airbus 330. A very warm welcome from the Irish crew members upon boarding the aircraft. Soon after takeoff we were served beverage service and then our main dinner course of which was up to high standards. The main course consisted of chicken or beef. A very tasty meal. The crew members were all welcoming and served the passengers with full courtesy and friendliness. I have to say the crew always work hard on these flights and are a pleasure to have on board. I definitely will be flying with them in the near future.	1
My wife and I flew the Toronto-Cancun route 3 times this season. (AC10-11) and were pleasantly surprised. When Rouge began operating this service I wrote a very negative review. I believe they have listened and are trying. My biggest complaint from the beginning was the insane seating discomfort. The new plane flying this route is a 767 and it is quiet clean maintained very well and the seating is very comfortable. The crew do their best and I have no problems with them whatsoever. Sometimes the flights were delayed but all in all we arrived safe and in good shape. That's all I ask of any airline when push comes to shove. The little nitpicky stuff pales beside safety and the incredible shape and performance of the aircraft and pilots gets us all back home. I am liking this route now and will not hesitate to purchase from Rouge. I think they should be applauded for righting a wrong.	1
In error I booked online a roundtrip flight from Vancouver to Edmonton for June 3d to the 9th instead of June 9 to the 16th, I booked cheap flights that were advertised as "restricted " due to financial constraints. I understood the limitations, but felt it necessary. It was also necessary to make the trip to support my daughter during a medical procedure. The error was devastating, I thought I had lost the total payment of the ticket and would have to rebook and repay the full amount. Apart from the loss of dollars, I felt silly making such a careless mistake. I called the ticketing agents and after an almost two hour wait, I spoke to "L" at approximately 4pm Saturday May 28/22. She was so patient and understanding and assured me she could help. Further, she comforted me by commenting there were those that had made far sillier mistakes than mine. She re booked the tickets for the correct days, assigned seats and sent a refund voucher for $20.00. The whole encounter was a successful and uplifting experience in a world where that happens infrequently. It is my sincere hope she has the opportunity to be praised and congratulated by her superiors and understands the sincerity of my appreciation.	1
Flight was cancelled recently from Shannon to Manchester 25.1.13. However Aer Lingus took the strain they organised overnight stay in a hotel and booked us onto the next flight the next day. Staff were excellent and could have not done more for us in a difficult situation.	1
Did my usual Christmas route LHR-SNN-LHR. All in all it was a great flight no delays staff were extremely friendly as always check-in was simple and they also offered to check in my carry on luggage free of charge. If Aer Lingus flew from Stansted I'd fly with them anytime I was going home.	1
I travelled from Melbourne to Vancouver with a technical stop in Shanghai Pudong and transit stop in Beijing Capital - and return. I was very impressed with the service. Flight attendants on all flights were very friendly attentive and polite. They were welcoming with smiles and laughs all around which made the long flight quite pleasant. Food was excellent - great Chinese cuisine (more western choice was also available) with generous servings. Inflight entertainment was good. To top things off - I bought the ticket at an excellent price - considerably lower that all other airlines. I would definitely consider flying with Air China again.	1
Dublin to London. I am a frequent global business traveller and was very impressed. Especially impressed with the friendliness of the cabin crew who were professional and helpful! Will definitely travel with them again.	1
Flew JFK to DUB return in J for the holidays. Check in at JFK is quick and easy and the oasis lounge is comfortable well stocked and quiet. What sets Aer Lingus apart is the friendly crew and to warm genuine Irish welcome on boarding . Although it was a full overnight flight the crew provided excellent service with generous drinks top ups and above average J food. The almost flat bed is reasonably comfortable for the length of flight. I only managed an hours sleep as its a short hop over the pond. Nice continental breakfast towels and proper tea before landing. Bags off first and overall excellent value. Return leg on the 105 on New Years Eve was excellent. Friendly J check in with no wait new T2 lounge quiet and the benefits of pre-flight clearance in Dublin are immeasurable. Again great crew generous drinks good food and warm smiles.	1
22nd November Dublin to Orlando. Business Class. Excellent service and cabin crew. Timekeeping excellent. Hope return flight on 19th January is as good!	1
Glasgow to Orlando via Dublin. Excellent service for the second time this year. The short flight Glasgow to Dublin is on a prop plane but is perfectly adequate for the short distance. Dublin-Orlando includes good entertainment food and most courteous cabin crew. A330 was very clean.	1
Alicante to Dublin on 27/10/2012. Although the flight was a little late leaving Alicante due to slow loading of passengers and hand luggage the actual journey was a pleasant experience. I thought all the staff were friendly and courteous. Arriving into Dublin well after midnight all the staff were still smiling and pleasant as passengers disembarked. I will travel again with EI as long as staff continue to smile and look like they care about passengers.	1
We flew United from Seattle to Chicago so was dreading the long flight to Dublin. Flight attendants were nice and helpful and much to my surprise the food wasn't half bad. Comparatively speaking the seats were comfortable; certainly roomier than those on United. Upon boarding each seat had a pillow in it and there were free movies and TV programs to choose from. Landed in Chicago 45 minutes early.	1
DUB-LIN and VRN-DUB - The usual Aer Lingus service. On time clean planes friendly FA's. Quite happy that they are enforcing the carry on luggage rule as planes now get off on time. I don't know why people are complaining about having to pay for food. Most EI flights are 2.5 hours or less. Eat before you leave or else bring your own food and stop complaining. I'm very happy with them and will continue to use them. For the fare you pay (if you book well in advance) I have few complaints about the service.	1
We were stranded in JFK on 31st Oct after our airline (a large American) had cancelled our flight for the second time as a result of the Super storm Sandy. The only flight they could re-schedule us for was on 8th Nov and the only customer service they offered was a card with a telephone number. We approached the Aer Lingus staff in JFK who despite having no obligation to help us said they would see what they could do. In the end they managed to accommodate us on their flights and got my family back to Dublin The Aer Lingus staff on the day showed customer service at its very best.	1
Travelled with Aer Lingus Regional (operated by Aer Arann) return from Birmingham to Shannon. Flights early in both directions. flight attendants attentive and friendly. Plane on outward journey was 23 years old! Seats were old and tatty but nonetheless clean and comfortable. Return flight on a modern aircraft which was in immaculate condition. Comfortable leather seats made the journey more endurable and the plane was spotless.	1
DUB-BOS return JFK-DUB. Service was very good steward was friendly and attentive food on the flight from Dublin to Boston two levels higher to rate than on the flight home (over seasoned crab cakes and greasy) I immediately got a different menu offered.	1
I traveled November 29 2021 from Barbados to Toronto, before I got to the Airport I received notification that the flight would be an hour delay, I appreciate the heads up so I wouldn't have to waste time getting to the airport to early. From checking my bags great customer service, nice and polite and check my bag with no issues. On board the flight I had the whole row to myself, the crew was so nice making sure I was ok got offered drinks and food often. The crew was the best part They did They jobs very well and it was an amazing flight back to Toronto. When I landed in toronto after customs whent to get my bags they were there waiting for me no damage and no issues. I had an amazing experience flying with Air Canada	1
Damage discovered to my wife’s walker upon arrival upon arrival in Edmonton. Submitted a claim to the AC baggage office. Secured replacement parts for $25 and submitted claim. Within 2 days Air Canada paid $50 via e-transfer and provided a voucher for 20% for up to 4 people, good for 3 years (easily worth $500 to $600). Compensation far exceeded my expectations!	1
Third time on a transatlantic flight with Aer Lingus. This time we travelled from Dublin to New York and back from Chicago to Dublin. Both flights on time. Clean and new aircraft good food excellent service and great films onboard!	1
Dublin-Malaga Malaga-Dublin. Onboard A330 which was fantastic! Onboard one of Aer Lingus' largest aircraft for a 2 hour flight! Took off on time clean cabin flight attendants and inflight entertainment was fantastic! Would recommend them.	1
Recently my daughter and I flew to Shanghai from Toronto on Air Canada. When we arrived in Shanghai, there was a problem with my daughter's visa and we were sent back to Toronto. It was such a difficult thing for us! Painful! But the staff on both the flight from Shanghai to Seoul and then from Seoul to Shanghai were unbelievably kind and thoughtful. They immediately offered words of encouragement, a listening ear, and comfort. I was so impressed at how a little kindness (a lot of kindness, in this case) can make such a difference when one is in distress! Either your teams are well-trained for situations like this, or they are just intuitive. I don't know. But hats off to Don and his crew! I wish I knew all of your names! We will certainly remember Air Canada and choose you again!	1
Our flight was great and the service wonderful. Staff polite and welcoming and the food good. We had first run movies TV shows games. We flew from New York to Ireland to Italy and back. Would recommend this airline 100%.	1
Flew Air Canada Rouge from Montreal to Orlando and then Orlando back to Toronto. The staff were young but very professional and friendly. Very impressed. The complementary drinks were as excepted and I hate airplane food so I was very happy no one included myself was buying any. Both flights I was able to get preferred economy seats at no charge (once at airline kiosk and once at the gate) Had exit row seats both flights and i have never had so much leg room and recline in economy. It is worth paying extra for preferred economy because the back of the plane looked like a sardine jar! Overall extremely satisfied! My only complaint is that you can watch entertainment with the android app which is so stupid as far more people have android than apple!	1
AC 1827 on 28 January Vancouver to Kahului Maui. First time flying on Air Canada Rouge. Excellent flight. Will have to see if the same service is on the return flight.	1
I've flown Aer Lingus twice a round trip from Helsinki to Dublin and another round trip from Dublin to Bologna. All flights were on time A320 nice and clean with leather seats that have head rests. Flight attendants have always been friendly providing excellent service. Check-in at the airport and getting an assigned seat is particularly nice and makes standing in line for boarding unnecessary. Great value for money and I fly with them on every opportunity.	1
Travelled to USA - economy class outbound and business class inbound. Service was superb both ways. Staff friendly on both transatlantic flights and on Glasgow - Dublin / Dublin - Glasgow flights. I would have no hesitation in travelling with Aer Lingus again.	1
BHX-DUB-ORD. Very professional crew frequent updates from the pilots arrived 50 mins ahead of schedule food was very nice for economy class. Cabin crew very attentive and always checking up to make sure everything is okay and offering more free tea and coffee. Cabin was very clean and bright and quite quiet. IFE had a large range. Pre clearance at Dublin airport was fantastic and meant we were out within 25 mins once we reached Chicago.	1
Southend to Dublin. Excellent airport new route from May. Aircraft was nice clean ART42 nice leather seats which had plenty of legroom for the 1 hr 35 minute flight. Excellent inflight with smiling hostess.	1
Flights in December and January from London to Sydney via Beijing and back. We armed ourselves with our own food and laptops with extra batteries for movies etc. but we have found this to be one of the better flights we have ever been on. The attendants were polite and pleasant and all spoke English. The food was lovely and more than enough to fill you up with drinks at regular intervals. And if that wasn't enough you just press the button and ask for more. Toilets were as clean as you can expect from 300 people all using the same few loos. But after almost every one went in an attendant followed to clean up and replace loo roll etc. Space between seats was more than ample with at least 10 inches between your knees and the seat in front and even when the person in front put their seat back the seat wasn't right in your face. The entertainment was really good with over 40 films in English and games and music and even TV shows. Overall we can not fault this air line and we would most definitely recommend to others especially with it being over £3000 cheaper than other airlines!	1
My husband and I flew business class last week to Cancun from Toronto and return. We couldn't have asked for more attentive flight attendants good food and emphasis on detail. Was a little hesitant about flying Rouge for the first time after all the bad reviews but sometimes I think the passenger in the seat might be the problem. Congratulations to Air Canada for their creation of Rouge couldn't have asked for a better flight and flight crew.	1
Took 4 kids aged 3 to 11 to Sydney from London via Beijing. Check in was great both going and coming with staff giving us configuration of seats we wanted on all legs. Service on planes was good (unless you like to drink in which case Air China wouldn't be my choice!). Movies great for us and kids and food good (although beware the fermented black egg for breakfast which my 3 yo still talks about with horror). All flights took off on time and Beijing airport was fine if a bit limited in choices. Would highly recommend as their price was £2k cheaper than next alternative.	1
DUB-MAD. Airbus A320. Boarded 30 minutes prior to departure and left ahead of schedule. Terminal 2 in Dublin very clean modern and spacious. Cabin crew friendly efficient and professional throughout. Purchased drinks and snacks which were of good quality and sold at reasonable prices. Seats leather and comfortable with acceptable legroom. All in all a good flight. The only negative aspect was Madrid Terminal 1 which is old fashioned and lacked any decent facilities.	1
CA 1231 8 Jan Beijing - Xi'An First Class. From check-in at Beijing to arrival in Xi'An an excellent service for a 1 hr 50 mins flight. Staff assisted with self service check in and baggage check-in fast track security procedures and access to the Air China First Class Lounge - huge facility with ample seating eating and entertainment areas. Seating on 737-800 2-2 with total of 12 seats. Hot towel and welcome juice or water on boarding. Very comfortable seat for a single aisle aircraft lie flat seats with ample recline and footrest. Choice of either a Western or Chinese breakfast - excellent coffee and bread basket service. Cereal fresh fruit hot meal of sausages tomato's and omelette. Another hot towel after meal. Attentive but unobtrusive service. Definitely a benchmark service for other airlines I use considering such a short flight.	1
Dublin to JFK November 2011. Boarded Airbus A330 on time staff both pleasant and efficient ensuring a quick boarding had seat just behind bulkhead for business class. This area contains 12 or 14 seats and is worth paying extra for - comfortable and entertainment excellent. The flight was nice crew keeping us informed on route and weather etc meals passable at best! However on par with most other carriers from my experience overall a nice flight and felt well looked after.	1
BHX-DUB return. I have flown this route with Ryanair and although it is marginally cheaper (£5 or so) Aer Lingus is worth it. Much more comfortable cabin and seats friendly staff and excellent service. Arrived to destination early.	1
DUB-MCO. Assisted to the whole family in getting seats at the front of economy class. Dublin is a very clean airport to fly through but I went with Aer Lingus before the big move to terminal 2. Terminal 1 is still very nice. During the flight the cabin crew were nice and food was lovely. All together a lovely flight.	1
DUB-LIN and BLQ-DUB. M Wickham's comments re: Venice are interesting. I had the same experience flying back from Bologna where the captain made reference to problems on the ground. Took an age to get people to the gate and onto the buses to the plane. No reason for it. Just typical Italian laid back attitude. Still made up time on the way back and only ended up 5 mins late. Both flights were fine on time clean aircraft and friendly FA's.	1
JFK-DUB-LGW return Y Class. Purchased emergency exit seats for transatlantic sectors. Seats comfortable with extra legroom and FA on JFK-DUB supplied additional blankets. Food simple but adequate service charming and caring. Three hour delay at JFK so missed connection to LGW impressed with EI's handling and were rebooked on next flights while in the air new boarding cards with breakfast vouchers awaiting our arrival at DUB.	1
I would like to post an extremely positive comment for the head purser of flight AC860 from Vancouver to London on Tuesday 14th September 2021 departing at 18:15pm. His mannerisms and the service offered was excellent, which is very refreshing in this day and age.	1
Travel Dublin to London every week. The aircraft's are comfortable the food choice good and the cabin crew professional and friendly. Gold circle lounges are well stocked. The only complaint I would have is if you are on a flight after 18.00 out of Dub there is normally a member of staff mopping the floor something I feel should be saved for after the lounge is closed.	1
LGW-Malaga return Economy. Booked online so downloaded my boarding pass 24 hours before flight which with only hand luggage made things simple and fast at Gatwick. Plane was A320 clean tidy and staff were friendly and helpful. Onboard food and drinks were quite expensive seats surprisingly wide and comfortable flight took off and landed on time. Return flight was hampered by not being able to download my boarding pass so no fast track  I had to queue at Malaga for over 1 hr and the flight was delayed for 30 mins but because of tailwinds we arrived at Gatwick 10 mins early.	1
Manchester to JFK via Dublin. Flight from Manchester to Dublin was delayed for 1 hr through no fault of Aer Lingus. They held the plane for us at Dublin and as soon as we arrived we were personally ushered straight through passport control and US customs. I was impressed the flight attendants friendly and helpful the food good and the inflight entertainment was excellent.	1
DUB-ORD in Business Class. Excellent service once again - provided by professional and attentive cabin crew throughout the flight. The onboard dining experience was just perfect. IFE options have been updated in the past twelve months and are very broad. All luggage arrived promptly at ORD and we were out of the terminal within 20 minutes of landing.	1
Boston to Shannon recently. The service was excellent flight attendants were warm and pleasant. The food was very good along with the wines. I will continue to fly Aer Lingus.	1
Chicago to Dublin return in Economy. Orderly boarding in Chicago for a full flight. Friendly and efficient cabin crew who were nicely presented. A lot of babies and small children on this flight but it was nice to see they helped families get settled quickly. Food good quality and lots of water runs during the night. Seatback entertainment very good. Immigration and baggage all fast at Dublin.	1
Cork to LHR return. Flights left on time friendly crew on both sectors good selection of food and drinks for sale at reasonable prices cabin fresh and clean.	1
AC1872 YUL-MCO on December 6 2014. I was flying in Premium rouge and was curious what the experience would be like given all the reviews. I'm aware that there is a vast discrepancy between Premium rouge and regular rouge service however I would have to say that I was quite pleased with my experience. On this flight the Premium rouge cabin was less than half-full and service was smooth and punctual. All staff were very friendly and ensured that any needs were met. The meal service went well with the standard mainline AC offerings and the food was moist and flavourful. iPads were distributed and while I had my own media with me I opted to try the distributed iPad simply for the experience. The library of films was a bit on the older side but for someone who isn't a cinephile the selection should be sufficient. The video quality was a bit grainy at times given the streaming service but was consistent. The seating arrangement on this A319 in Premium rouge is 3x3 with the middle seats blocked and with pillows seat-belted in where a human would otherwise be. I found the seating arrangement very roomy and to be honest I think that I actually preferred it to the mainline J cabin seating! The legroom was about the same as on the mainline J cabin. I enjoyed having the tray table space of the empty middle seat to put my drink and personal items on instead of putting them on my own tray so as to optimize space. Additionally the under-seat storage of the middle seat allowed easy access and storage for my carry-on bag without having to reach up to the overhead bin and without impeding my own legroom. The colour scheme of the Premium rouge cabin is also quite nice and is a refreshing change from the blue tones of the mainline J cabin. All in all I had a pleasant experience on Air Canada rouge in the Premium rouge cabin however I'm sure my review would be vastly different in the regular rouge cabin given how little legroom there is there (I'm 5'11 so I would be sure to notice it). Thus I would recommend flying rouge so long as you can get a seat in Premium rouge.	1
After booking at such a low fare I was a bit worried but my fears were unfounded. We boarded a very well maintained new Boeing 757 in Chicago for our trip to Dublin and Amsterdam. Two good quality hot airline meals individual LCD flat panels on each seat back with free movies shows and navigation displays. When our departure in Chicago was delayed due to a thunderstorm Aer Lingus held our connecting flight in Dublin and an employee personally escorted us at Dublin airport to make sure we made our connection.	1
Travelled to Faro and returned to Belfast. Staff where great and the flight was on time with very comfortable seating. I travel back and forward to Great Britain on a regular basis and also to Europe and Canada I will try and book Air Lingus when possible.	1
JFK-Dublin. Business Class. Return leg of previous review. Efficient boarding at JFK for what was a very full flight. Great Cabin crew who did a nice meal service that wasn't too rushed but not too lengthy either giving passengers who to get some sleep the opportunity. Good Cabin Crew presence throughout the night and they certainly kept the galley noise to a minimum which was much appreciated. Slept well for 4 hrs straight and crew served a very tasty breakfast an hour out of Dublin. Priority bags out very quickly for Dublin anyway and customs a breeze. Can't fault Aer Lingus on this flight they seem to be getting the balance just right on the LCC model. Business Class fares very competitive on this route.	1
DUB-JFK in Business class. Very impressed with all aspects of the flight. New Gold Circle lounge in Dublin's Terminal 2 is a real improvement on the old lounges. Cabin Crew just first class very friendly and efficient and nothing was too much trouble. With US pre-clearance in Dublin I'm surprised more people aren't using Dublin as a hub for transatlantic flights as the new Terminal is a breeze to get through.	1
The service I received from a phone operator for Air Canada was phenomonal. His name was Aaron and he was so compassionate as I dealing with a step Dad and Poppy to my kids getting ready to pass away. I very much need to be there for my Mom and he understood that and helped make changing my flights so much easier. Thank you Aaron, you are my angel today and the stress that has been lifted off of me feels so good. I will pay it forward for sure.	1
NOC-LGW with elderly infirm passenger. Friendly service from Aer Lingus at Knock Airport. They arranged a wheelchair there and then for us (normally have to warn them 48 hours prior) and got us to the plane. After nightmare journeys with Ryanair (never again) to Ireland in the past treating their passengers like animals this was much appreciated.	1
Gatwick to Malaga. Excellent flight no delays comfy leather seats 32 inch seat pitch in economy compared to Thomson and Easyjet and it was a cheaper fare. Cabin crew attentive. After inflight sales they advised passengers to use call button if anything was required.	1
JFK-DUB-LGW return. A comfortable seat with adequate legroom appreciated being able to buy an exit row seat for the night flight attentive but professional cabin crew food simple but tasty. Dublin a very compact and easy transfer airport looking forward to the completion of move to the new T2.	1
London Gatwick - Malaga return in economy class. Online booking was simple enough with extras available (seat selection extra baggage lounge access etc) at a reasonable cost after the booking was confirmed. My comments below refer to both the outbound and inbound flights unless otherwise mentioned. Check-in was quick and efficient with friendly staff. Oddly though check-in at Malaga opened just one and a half hours before departure despite their website suggesting that you arrive two and a half hours before. Boarding was pain free and organised with special needs passengers quietly loaded first with assigned seating there was no scrum. Cabin was clean and tidy on an A320 with standard seating and adequate leg room. The cabin crew were friendly and attentive and the in-flight service was relaxed and well performed. A good selection of food and drink was served at an unusually reasonable cost. My bacon baguette was so good I asked for another! Arrived early (by fifteen minutes in Malaga and thirty minutes in London) and was off the plane promptly. I can't comment on baggage arrival times as I had hand baggage only.	1
Gatwick- Knock flight very good. Coming home on 17th December after sitting on the plane for two hours the flight was cancelled due to cabin crew working to long because of the heavy snow and the delays. Aer Lingus were fantastic and put us up for two nights in a wonderful Hotel.	1
My wife and I booked flights through Flight Network but chose Air Canada as the carrier. We had to cancel our flight due to COVID-19 back in June. We went back and forth with Flight Network to try and get our Air Canada travel voucher (we were owed). Even Air Canada customer relations told us we had to go through the 3rd party provider to collect the voucher that Air Canada had already sent to them. We made a final plea with Air Canada to please cancel the travel voucher they sent to Flight Network and send directly to us. Air Canada came through. The customer service agent was very understanding and really came through for us. No more booking through Flight Network. We will book directly through Air Canada now. It really comes down to how Air Canada treated us. And although they've sometimes received bad reviews in the past, we really think they're turning a corner. Post COVID-19 when everyone in the world wants to travel like crazy, look out for Air Canada. Their planes will be full with customer service like we received.	1
I had flown back to Toronto for a family emergency and did not book a return flight. While attempting to book a flight home there were some issues and I ended up being billed for a ticket I did not need. After some back and forth and confusion I spoke with a woman named Betty from the Montreal office. She was extremely helpful, and very patient with me as this was a somewhat confusing issue. Adding the stress of this extra charge on top of my family emergency was obviously upsetting. She placed me on hold and when she returned had informed me everything was taken care of and I would be getting a refund. Thank you so much for your compassion and professionalism!	1
Departed Toronto to London on December 12, 2019 morning flight and returned London to Toronto on January 1, 2020 AC 857. I have to say check in, boarding process, in flight on all flights were well organized and quick, all staff were attentive when needed but left you when needed. All staff were great and very pleasant. We fly Air Canada regularly and sometimes things go wrong these are usually out of control of the staff and our experience is they are always professional and friendly. Air Canada you know your business keep doing what you do as you are good at it!	1
Air Canada flew an empty plane to Cancun last week to provide passage home to a number of people, including my wife and me, stranded in Mexico. The flight from Cancun to Toronto was only half full. While AC did not make any money on this flight, they are certainly to be thanked for their efforts on our behalf. Well done to our national airline. We were certainly grateful that you came, got us and delivered us safely back to Canada. Thank you, Merci beaucoup!	1
Dusseldorf to Saskatoon via Frankfurt. I wanted to change my flight back to Germany in order to be able to fly directly to Frankfurt, rather than via London. The support at Air Canada Saskatoon couldn't have been more helpful. They changed my flights, booked my seats and din't charge me anything. Thank you, Air Canada!	1
Dublin to Toronto. I found the flight fine. There are two problems with this airline lack of leg room and the lack of seat back screens. As I'm not that tall the lack of leg room didn't bother me but can see a problem if you are. I downloaded the app onto my ipad. The films were outdated so wouldn't bother with that. The staff were friendly and professional. The food was nice for airline food. Overall I enjoyed my flight.	1
We flew Montreal to Rome Oct 4th and back Oct 18th. We found Premium Rouge very good. Food going to Rome was good food on the return flight was excellent! We had no problems with the free iPad and the movies were up to date. In fact we liked using the iPad! Seats were roomy. Check in staff were good. Priority boarding for Premium Rouge was good. Staff both flights were excellent and attentive. Would definitely fly Rouge again but would book Premium Economy.	1
New Delhi to Vancouver. This flight was very impressive, the kind of flight where you would love to fly AC again. We were warmly greeted and directed to our seats. The biz class seats are much nicer from when we last flew them 6 years ago. There is more room and more storage space and a mattress pad as well. We both managed too get comfortable sleep at the beginning of this 14.5 hr. flight. The food was very good and plentiful. I slept through breakfast so th FA'S whipped up a snack of cheeses, chicken Tikka and a nice Cognac to go with it. Our lunch was amazing. I had lamb chops, salad, and mashed with a nice chilled Molson and then there was desert, a fluffy butterscotch torte, cheeses and ice cream, and a Couvasier Cognac to follo and Lavazza coffee. The IFE system was very easy to use and had a lot of options for movies, TV, music, etc. too many to list and the hand held device was easy to use. The flight crew were very polite and attentive too and I had a chance to speak with them during a slow moment they had and they were so nice. We have flown other top rated carries such as ANA, Thai, Asiana, Emirates, Turkish and Cathay Dragon but this one AC flight tops them all. Bravo! Well done!	1
Round-trip Montreal-Rome in Premium Rouge on the B767 on one of the 2 non refurbished B767 with only 3 rows (instead of 4) - older seats but more legroom. Very satisfied with trip overall - lots of legroom food was good got some sleep in the recliner style seat service was good overall - just some minor issues / inconsistencies that you don't see on mainline. The leg rest and footrest were useless for me because I am tall. The big pillow added the lumbar support. Great value for price paid. Of course not a flatbed like business class but also not the same price! So for me I would not hesitate to take again premium rouge on the B767. I would also strongly consider trying the premium economy section on mainline 787 and 777HD after my experience on rouge.	1
Calgary to Quebec City via Montreal. Excellent. The service on this brand new Airbus 220 was flawless. Always appreciate the professional and polite service on Air Canada. Meal was great, entertainment selections plentiful. I will continue to enjoy flying with Air Canada, have been loyal for over 20 years, never a bad experience to record. Some people are impossible to please, even by a company that obviously cares as much about the passenger experience as Air Canada does. This last flight is one of literally hundreds with Air Canada over the years, they have never disappointed me in my travels. Thank you Air Canada.	1
Toronto to London. Fantastic experience. Valet service took me from connecting domestic flight straight to the gate. Excellent service, food and comfort throughout the trip, both before and during the flight.	1
Toronto to Vancouver. Upon boarding at Toronto Pearson airport at gate 38 on December 18 2019 the Air Canada crew noticed that although I have super elite status my seat was way at the back. When inquiring about it I told Annette that it was a last minute booking and no other better seat was available. Without asking for any change Annette asked me if I didn’t mind to wait for a second to check if there was a better seat for me. Within few seconds she came back with a new boarding pass and a better seat. That is the best service when you really don’t expect it. Thank you Annette And Air Canada for a best in class service!	1
My husband and I flew Dublin to Toronto direct on 8 Sept and returned Sept 15 in the premium economy cabin the aircraft was a 767 both ways with a 2-2-2 seating configuration. We chose this airline mainly on price - approx £ £400 cheaper per ticket than British Airways or Virgin PE from London via I think New York. The first thing to say is that if you are expecting Business Class seating/facilities you will be disappointed. This was nothing like the BC we have used on Emirates and Turkish Airlines. However as a premium economy offering at an exceptionally good price we were very pleasantly surprised - in fact we could not fault it. I would judge it not quite as good as Virgin PE but certainly equal to if not better than British Airways PE. We were able to use the priority lanes for both check in and security clearance on both legs the aircraft was clean and comfortable the cabin crew were all extremely pleasant helpful presentable and very professional (other reviewers have complained that the crew are young and inexperienced; they were certainly young but we could not fault the service they provided throughout). In fact I much preferred the Canada Rouge crews with their positive can-do attitude to the 'Can I really be bothered?' stand-offish attitude I have experienced more than once on British Airways. We had no problems at all with the tablets issued to us for entertainment an issue that some reviewers have been unhappy with. The food choices were not extensive but certainly sufficient of good quality and presented nicely. Drinks both alcoholic and non-alcoholic were good quality and frequently offered. I would say well done Canada Rouge - in our experience you have an excellent value for money product at least in the PE cabin. We will certainly use again for transatlantic flights.	1
Excellent staff. I hope someone from Air Canada reads this review. I flew on Monday 11th, November with AC859 from London to Toronto. All the cabin crew were friendly, supportive and looked like they love their job. Most of Air Canada's crews are like that but last night it was beyond good. Although the weather conditions were bad and we landed with delays the captains are awesome sharing with the news and extra smooth take of and landing .They never lost their mood and kept on serving us. Thank you very much.	1
Brisbane to Vancouver. My trip on 4 Sept 19, was a very pleasant, comfortable trip. Staff and food were great. My baggage was damaged on arrival, reported it, got claim no, they did offer immediate repair on wheel if i was to be there for 3 days, however I was on a tour, elected to do it on my return home. Within a week of coming home on 4 Oct 19, I did online claim, easy enough for an girl, response with in 24 hrs, claim settled within 2 weeks. Cant beat that, thanks Air Canada.	1
Sydney to Vancouver  in February 2020. I actually want to highly commend an Air Canada ticketing agent.! I received incredible service from Gonzalo who went out of his way to assist me in purchasing a B-class economy fare and then upgrading to business using points. He initially could not find any availability for me and I hung up, very disappointed, after thanking him. Gonzalo then did something which NO other Air Canada agent has done and  called me back!  He then proceeded to assist me with exactly what I needed. I cannot thank him enough! I think he should receive some commendation from Air Canada for his outstanding and beyond helpful service to travellers flying with Air Canada.	1
We spend several months traveling this Summer and flew with a number of airlines, and Air Canada was the best, head and shoulders above others. They were efficient in getting people on and off their flights, the crew and staff were friendly and genuinely helpful. We didn't expect food on our flights. Not only was there food, but it was good. They have a stopover program, which allowed us to stopover in Toronto for no extra charge. The flight attendants, between them, spoke 7 languages. Where there were lines, the moved people with soon to be departing flight to the front of the line. Here is an example of how great the Air Canada people are. On our flight from London to Toronto there was a man who had taken his 3 children to London (by himself) for a holiday and they were returning home. His 3 children sat together behind us and he sat in an aisle seat across from them. Not long into the flight an exhausted dad fell asleep and the flight attendants took over. Mind you the children were delightful, but the flight attendants were amazing with the children. The flight staff made that flight pleasant for everyone. That was the daytime.flight from London to Toronto on October 15th and the flight staff really should be commended. While that flight was remarkable, all our Air Canada flights were great. I will fly Air Canada every chance I get.	1
Brussels to Montreal. What an improvement over my last flight. This time, the food made all the difference. The vegetarian meal was excellent: full of flavour, quality ingredients and was an appropriate size. Red wine on board was delicious as well. I had decided to abandon Air Canada for international flights until I took this flight. It seems, based on my conversation with a crew member, that the airport of origin matters, although I hope it doesn't! Crew was very kind and accommodating, nothing could have been better about this flight given the amount I paid for this portion of my trip. They have an ample selection on their in-flight entertainment system although I do not judge an airline's quality based on that nor the availability of Wi-Fi but rather treat them as bonuses.	1
Dublin to Toronto with Air Canada. 7+ hour flight. Boarded and took off quickly. Really wonderful staff and captain. Very proud of what they do. Multiple announcements to keep us in the know throughout the flight. Actually great food.	1
Toronto to London. This review is only for Check-In desk staff. My kid and parents were travelling, and their seats were not together. The staff were humble and helpful and went above and beyond to get their seats together. I really appreciate her efforts as my kid was just 21 months old. I'm really thankful to that lady.	1
This past Thursday we were on our way back to Vancouver from DC through Montreal with Air Canada. On the second leg of the trip, we were seated in the 15th row (preferred seating) in front of the exit row and discovered our seats didn’t recline. We asked the flight director if we could move and before take off he remembered our request and moved us to two vacant bulkhead seats. The rest of the flight crew were just as professional and attentive. We felt it was important to acknowledge that this crew went above and beyond to make our trip enjoyable!	1
Brisbane to Vancouver. From the moment we were greeted by the cabin crew, we knew we were in for a good flight. We were very pleasantly surprised by the leg room and general space of the aircraft.  The food options were suitable for the journey and the cabin was well lit to reduce jet lag.	1
Our family traveled from Vancouver to Los Angeles with Air Canada Rouge last week. We found the staff to be the nicest flight staff by far from all airlines we have travelled with before. We have flown multiple times with US Airways Air Canada and West Jet we found that Rouge was the friendliest by far. An example what the staff did for us if that they saw that we traveled with an infant the flight was completely full however the flight attendants get 3 reserved seats at the very back of the plane for them to rest they gave up this entire row so my daughter could sleep laying down on 2 seats and myself beside her. I usually don't write comments online but I see people always writing poor comments online I want people to read this and see that the staff do everything to make the flight the best for the passengers the seats are more tight however their service makes it worthwhile for me to fly with them again.	1
Vancouver to Melbourne. This flight was the largest flight of my trip and my second last flight of my 5 flight trip and my first time on Air Canada.  I was pleasantly surprised by the friendliness of the staff and how chatty they where, they wanted to know how my time was in Canada which i thought was nice considering i was flying only in economy class. The seats where very comfy compared to Lufthansa and the in flight entertainment was much better than Lufthansa. Overall the flight went quick because of the great service, food, entertainment and comfort! I recommend Air Canada for long haul flights to and from Canada, but i will stick to Singapore Airlines for the rest of the world only because of their reward system is amazing! Great flight with Air Canada.	1
Toronto to Hong Kong in Premium Economy for the first time. Although it is significantly more expensive than economy, it is also significantly better. 10 across in Economy is painful. The reason I am writing this review and would give Air Canada top marks is the experience that they (and one particular person) gave to my daughter. She was running down the aisles multiple times in the middle of the 15.5 hour flight and got the attention of one of the flight attendants, Joyce. After getting our ok, she spent the next hour showing my daughter how the whole back of the plane service worked and gave my daughter an experience that she will never forget. She was amazing and Air Canada is lucky to have her.	1
London to Toronto and this was a much better experience with Air Canada than the one I enjoyed last Monday and Tuesday, because although my flight back to London in 19th August 2019 was ok the only bad part about the flight was that I sat in the back of the plane and it was the worst place to sit on a plane because of the engines being so loud and felt big turbulence. But, my flight to Toronto on 21st July 2019 was much better because a great part about the flight was that I was originally supposed to sit in 21H aisle seat but they changed it to 21K window seat and it was the best seat I had and the engines were much quieter but on my return flight.	1
Rome to Toronto. An excellent flight. Welcoming refreshments on boarding, Good Choice of Newspapers. Professional, Courteous and Competent in Flight Staff. Excellent Meal (Better than coming out of Toronto). Good Choice of Wine & Champagne. In Flight Entertainment easy to operate and a good selection of films etc. This is how I expect Air Canada to be. On time departure and arrival. Bags promptly delivered.	1
London Heathrow to Toronto. It was an awesome flight with Air Canada because when I checked in, my seat was originally 21H but the lady at the airport changed my seat to 21K which is the window seat and I sat next to the wing.  When I boarded, I went to meet the pilot and they were such gentlemen. It was also been such a long time I took a 777 Flight. Always go for the engine seat on the 777!	1
Toronto to Vancouver. I had an excellent flight with Air Canada last week. The 777-LR with the pods and AC's Signature service is wonderful. The staff were attentive and friendly. I had the beef and the salad, dessert and cheese with a glass of wine were memorable. I flew on their latitude fare (which is full fare economy) and they gave me an up-grade from economy to a seat in the front cabin. My advice is if you fly several times a year fly with the same carrier or alliance because they notice and treat you like gold. One can look for a lower cost fare. However, as a tall guy I really appreciate the service and the big seat and it was very comfy. Also, the IFE was excellent. The AC wide body planes have an excellent number of choices and the front cabin has very large screens. I watched two films and hopefully when I fly AC again I can watch the other half of the third film I was watching. I appreciate that they have 'classic' films because the recent films are not necessarily my first choice.	1
London to Toronto. I recently had a flight with Air Canada. The staff were very kind and helpful. The lounge was the best I've seen! The seats were amazing and so was the food!	1
Vancouver to Brisbane. An excellent lounge. My seat on the plane was not the most comfortable, but being tall was not bad. The cabin staff were very good. I couldn't eat or drink very much and staff helped me in every way possible. They were all caring, I will fly with them again.	1
Zurich to Toronto. This was the penultimate leg of a business class odyssey through Asia. It was the most impressive of six segments. Air Canada configures their 787 business class cabin 1-2-1, which is considerably more comfortable than United's 2-2-2. The downside to AC's arrangement is that you have to stretch and contort in order to see out the window. The flight was about 95% full, with the business class cabin at 100%. I have seldom, if ever, had a more attentive crew. Between meal services, there was always at least one attendant patroling the cabin eager to serve. The Thai chicken curry was excellent - and I had just spent four days in Bangkok. I hope Air Canada management reads these reviews, because they can be quite pleased with all aspects of this long-haul service.	1
Vancouver to Hong Kong. A trip riddled with personal hiccups, but Air Canada managed to make it feel better. I was running a little late for my flight and in the heat of it all, left one of my carry-ons at a security checkpoint for domestic departures. While I wasn’t able to get the item back the ground staff and cabin crew went above and beyond their fall of duty in helping me get it back. It didn’t work out in the end, but I appreciate the effort from contact numbers to the flight attendant that literally stepped off the plane to help me look. They really didn’t have to, but I am very thankful for their efforts. As for the premium economy cabin itself, it’s very small, comprising of 3 rows, totalling 24 seats. They’re significantly wider than economy seats and closely resemble the regional business class product. The seats were comfortable and I managed to catch 6 hours of sleep on a 14 hour flight, but they a cosmetic refresh may be due, with slightly warped armrests and scratched glossy plastic seatbacks negatively impacting the aesthetics. IFE was touchscreen and remote controlled, though the touchscreen functions were somewhat unwieldy compared to economy class TVs. Food was above average, with a premium (though not business class worthy) first meal with proper porcelain and metal cutlery, followed by what seemed to be a standard economy class meal (I believe Cathay Pacific also does the same thing). They also have a chicken pesto ciabatta as a snack prior to landing and that was good too, chicken was tender and well seasoned. I would also note that typical of a North American airline, Air Canada does offer good coffee (Lavazza) even in regular economy, so that’s a plus. Overall, Air Canada has drastically improved their long haul product over the years, while maintaining fairly reasonable fares for international flights. As a full service airline, flying to Hong Kong, their most comparable competitor for the route is Cathay Pacific, of whom I have referenced regularly. Given a choice between the two, I would pick Air Canada for value, and surprisingly, food as well- they’re generally much cheaper and there seems to be better attention to detail with regards to food and beverage. On the other hand Cathay is still able to offer more convenient time slots and premium economy in their flights includes 3 checked bags, though typically at a significantly higher price, so who you do fly with definitely depends on your needs, but Air Canada is definitely a viable option to get you there.	1
I had an excellent experience flying with Air Canada from Newark to Vancouver. Check In at the airport was well organized and I enjoyed spending several hours in the Air Canada lounge. The food and wine was excellent and I got a fair amount of work done and enjoyed doing some reading. The Boeng 787is a beautiful plane. The business class seating is generous and comfortable. I particularly like the large screen and the choices with AC's IFE. The staff were friendly and attentive. I enjoyed the food (chose the beef and enjoyed the smoked salmon), dessert and appreciated the choice in wines. I recognize one of the attendants from a flight to Mexico and we had several nice chats. Also, the Chief Flight Attendant took time to speak with the passengers in the cabin. I've decided to go for another trip to New York City. It's just wonderful to be able to fly there non-stop in a beautiful plane like the Boeing 787.	1
My family and I had arrived late and we were frantically scrambling for a flight to Hawaii, because we had pre-paid for our hotels and activities. WestJet and other airlines were less than helpful, but Ivy with Air Canada accommodated us well, despite the fact that our original flight wasn’t with their airline.	1
Calgary to Dallas via Vancouver. I need to say how incredible Haroon at the air Canada desk was. A pragmatic problem solver and a compassionate heart. Thank you for all your help.	1
Halifax to Ottawa. My main reason for the review is the great experience I had checking into my Air Canada flight from Halifax to Ottawa on March 8th, 2019. The Customer Service Rep Alan made the check in process very smooth. He was a great help and very pleasant, thank you Alan	1
Toronto to London. The most considerate and well organized airline I have ever flown. Canadian kindness with an aesthetic beauty of the lounge. This was coupled with transport to the connecting gate for business class. .Food, staffing, lounge were above Emirates and the crowded Lufthansa lounge.	1
First time with Air Canada. Traveled Boston to Dubai return via Toronto. Had trepidations about booking with them based on existing reviews but wanted to avoid having to pay an additional $800 for a non-stop with another carrier. Outgoing packed a medium size carry-on in case checked luggage does not arrive with me. Turns out this precaution was totally not needed. Air Canada was wonderful. Ground staff were friendly, and importantly, were intelligent and understood passengers' questions. On all 4 flight sectors, service was efficient. On all flights but the last, FAs were cheerful and went about their tasks with a smile. Food was mediocre, but, really, who realistically expects fine dining in economy? Plenty of liquids and juices on board. Legroom was okay. Had an aisle seat for sectors 2 and 3, and middle-guy and window-guy could easily slip by without my having to stand up. All flights on time. Thank you, AC. Where have you been all my life? I am your new fan.	1
Houston to Frankfurt via Montreal. I showed up at the Houston airport without my passport and there was not time to go home to get it and return. The flight had been booked through Priceline so I called them. They said I was out of luck and there was nothing they could do. Then I tried calling Air Canada who the flight was through. The Air Canada lady worked hard to find an alternate route to Tel Aviv the same day since I had a tour starting the next morning. She was able to get an alternate route booked for me later in the day at no extra charge. I loved the plane, the food, and the personnel, not to mention that Air Canada was more affordable for me. They will be the first option on my list for my next flight overseas!	1
The flight from Toronto to Santiago de Chile started with a great meal at the Toronto Signature Lounge and the usual great comforts in a bus class flight. What was very special this time was the concierge service by on the ground in Santiago. Due to 1/2 hour delay we had to meet our domestic flight within one hour - tight! The concierge  guided us through immigration, luggage pick-up and security in person and with friendly patience. She also managed to secure a lost item.	1
Fort St. John to Las Vegas. Can’t say enough good things about the counter staff in Fort St John and customer service staff of Air Canada in general. Missed our plane because of overbooking problems and was completely compensated for our inconvenience.	1
Newark to Vancouver. Excellent service by the flight crew and flight attendants. We left 1.5 hours after schedule departure and yet arrived only half an hour after scheduled arrival. On top of that, the flight attendant for my row offered whole cans of drinks and served with a smile.	1
Cleveland to Lisbon via Toronto. I had my flight cancelled due to a snow storm. I purchased my flight to United, but operated by Air Canada. When trying to reschedule, the options from United were just unreasonable (2 days later). Then I called the Air Canada customer service. They were willing to book me on the next possible flight even outside their alliance. This is just amazing and rare to see. You can sense when you have a good CS when problems come up and AC totally nailed it.	1
Excellent return trip from Calgary to Sydney. Check in was flawless and simple. Onboard experience was simply great. No shortage of food / snacks / beverages. I flew Business domestic legs and Economy on the long haul sector. Even in Economy, beer wine and spirits were free and generously offered to the mostly Australian and Canadian passengers. Most passengers in my vicinity were surprised as other airlines charge for this from North America, even long haul. Food was tasty - fish, chicken or beef. Snack mid flight and hot breakfast - chive omlette or maple waffles - prior to landing. Flight crew were professional and friendly, well dressed and attentive. Entertainment full of choices, enough for both directions. Seat confortable with good recline for Economy. No complaints at all, would recommend Air Canada for flights to Australia. Very well done.	1
Flew Toronto-Puerto Vallarta-Toronto. Early both down and return! Great staff skewed younger and nice change from the stuffy regulars usually on AC! Service was great - purchased a wrap that was tasty! Entertainment - downloaded AC app and no problems both on my iPad and iPhone. Pitfall was not AC but the other passengers - one carry on means one not one plus a purse plus a backpack plus just "two little bags of shopping". Yes perhaps that is why you had no leg room your 5 carry on bags! There always has to be "that one" passenger and they always seem to sit near me! The seats are tight get over it you are on vacation - want a first class wide seat pay for one on a more expensive airline! Excellent service Rouge and can't wait to fly again!	1
Air Canada, Rome to Toronto 16 September 2018. It was my son's 13th Birthday and I really wants to thanks Pilots for their kindness by trying to celebrate my son birthday on the plane. They really made my son day and he was very happy. I wants to thanks them including the staff for everything it was amazing from all of them. Thank you I recommend Air Canada.	1
Rome to Toronto. One of my best flights. Amazing crew. Food was actually ok and it seemed like we were being fed every few hours. Very comfy. Smooth flight as I get anxiety, this time I had no issues. Thanks again for an amazing and safe flight home. Love to fly Air Canada.	1
Edmonton to Vancouver. Excellent airline service, from each and every Air Canada staff member I dealt with. My drivers license expired so I had to wait for my passport to be delivered to the airport. They put me on the next flight without hesitation. I found everyone just so kind and easy to deal with. Smiling and helpful. When I returned home I left my phone on the plane and stopped a random employee who could’ve said if they find it, it will be in the lost in found (or baggage claim) instead he went on the plane to look for it for me. I travelled with Air Canada  a few years ago and found the employees seemed unhappy and unhelpful. I’m happy to see the improvement! I will definitely choose Air Canada first next time I fly.	1
Los Angeles to Vancouver. Absolutely fabulous service from Bonnie, She really went the extra mile. Always there but never intrusive. Unfortunately wifi was not available. Catering was good.	1
Toronto to Munich. Great flight in international business (now known as AC Signature Class), which features the comfortable lie-flat beds. Cabin service crew was attentive, courteous, and prompt. The food service in Signature is noticeably better than domestic (narrow-body) business class. Airplane cleanliness was excellent, and the flight was generally very enjoyable.	1
Vancouver to Heathrow. I along with my family travelled on Aug 06 2018 in flight AC854 to London. Our agent given our meal preference as Hindu Meal non veg. But we were saved the vegetarian which appears to be a mistake. Staff was superb in her customer service and attitude was very positive and helpful. She politely listened to my concern and assured me that she will try to get the meal of your choice. To my surprise she served us the non veg after she finished serving. That was excellent. I would like put on record the she was excellent in her approach and addressed our concern in a very professional manner.	1
Flew with Air Canada from San Francisco to Montreal and the service was very good, not all flight attendants was smily but at least two were really kind with passengers. Food we bought on board was excellent. Overall flight, onboard entertainment as tv movies and series are just enough, but could offer more choices in French, seats of the B737 MAX not bad, I've seen worse on other B737-8 and 737-9 from other airlines. Luggage arrived very fast on carousel in Montreal. Didn't try wifi onboard so I can't review this part of the experience but will give three stars, guessing it's working properly.	1
Round trip Brisbane-Vancouver-Brisbane. Third trip in 3yrs. Used to have to fly to Sydney to get to Vancouver on a 777, the 787 a much better experience. Meals excellent, lots of choices, hot snacks on demand, and pre-packaged snacks and fruit available overnight. Entertainment options a bit weak: new releases aren't really new, 'world cinema' options mostly Asian or Bollywood, limited Canadiana, Franco options. Ended up watching TV series in bored desperation. 14+hrs is a long time! The seat cover mattress is long overdue (most Asian/Middle Eastern airlines have had them for eons). Quilt and pillow just right, amenities kit ok, basic. Staff friendly, courteous, available and not in your face all the time. Too bad they collect the noise cancelling headsets an hour before landing and you're stuck with useless earbuds.	1
Vancouver to Newark. Extremely comfortable seat, very good for both reclining and sleeping. Excellent service from the friendly cabin staff. Outstanding range of refreshments. Air Canada business lounge in Vancouver unhurried, relaxed and very comfortable. Would fly Air Canada any time!	1
Flew Air Canada from Montreal to Dublin. A good, comfortable flight in a new B737 MAX aircraft, sitting in international premium economy (in this plane it's the same as AC's domestic business class). Service crew was friendly as usual and the flight itself was on time. The seats are substantially more comfortable than in economy and the food is much better as well.	1
Montreal to Calgary. I had an amazing experience on this flight. I don’t normally go out of my way to leave a review, but the service I received exceeded all of my expectations !They were so accommodating and some of the most friendly and professional flight attendants I have met to date. I wish them all the best and hope they continue to make flights as memorable as they made mine.	1
I want to give a shout out and Kudos to the Air Canada staff in Paris and in Montreal. Our flight #881 from Paris to Toronto was delayed 8 hours due to weather. Once in Toronto we had another 4 hour drive back to Michigan. Staff at the ticket/customer service desk in Paris was awesome getting us moved to an earlier flight to Montreal then to Toronto. Once in Montreal, the staff were so helpful. Air Canada did not have to help us at all. They could have made us wait for the 9:00 pm flight, sitting in the Paris Airport for 12 hours then the flight and drive home. They all went above and beyond. The three of us were tired and confused but the staff came through! Thank you so much! Maybe if I had flown Air Canada to Paris to begin with, my luggage would not have been lost by Brussels Airlines! Whole trip - no luggage! This was my first time flying with Air Canada and would recommend them in the future.	1
Pittsburgh to Moncton via Toronto. Blessed by the Air Canada staff at the Pittsburgh airport. I was coming home from a ten day trip visiting family with a 2.5 year old and a newborn, and I did not have it all together. I realized while I was still waiting to board my first flight I had one diaper left, and a 7-hour trip ahead. The attendant at the desk overheard my plight and ran all over the airport and after three stores found me a tiny pack of diapers which she bought with her own money and ran down the gangway to give me. She turned and ran back up without a thought. The whole trip I was helped along by Air Canada staff.	1
Frankfurt to Toronto. I am a Canadian living in Germany flying to visit my parents with an infant and a toddler and my husband. Right at the beginning of the flight we were treated so nice and an Air hostess made us feel welcomed, she was so kind and understanding. I am really glad that I chose Air Canada for our trip.	1
My trip back from Washington, D.C. At Ronald Reagon airport I met this amazing Air Canada's personnel who was incredibly sweet and helpful from the checkin gate till boarding. This business trip was stressful due to some work complications but after experiencing his great customer service and cheerful personality I started to feel a bit relax.	1
Edmonton to Castlegar via Vancouver. I would like to say a special thank you to Air Canada employee in Castlegar B.C. We had a connection in Vancouver and unfortunately our luggage didn’t make the connecting flight to Castlegar. We desperately needed our bags as we traveling to Grand Forks and leaving for a Comox by vehicle the following day. Nichole was kind enough to immediately contact couriers in Grand Forks to ensure that we would receive our luggage as soon as it arrived from Vancouver. We understand that luggage gets lost from time to time, but it is never convenient. Our whole family thanks you, as we were in Grand Forks to help elderly parents move to Vancouver Island and time was of the essence. You made our day when when the courier arrived with our luggage, thank you for not sending our luggage with Greyhound as that could have a disaster.	1
I would like to say a big thank you to the lady who helped me over the phone with Air Canada to book me a flight for my nephews funeral. After a very hard week, she helped me so much and I had wished I grabbed her name to thank her properly. I appreciate everything you did for me,  you have no idea how grateful I am.	1
Toronto to Laguardia. Had an extremely positive experience with Air Canada and their staff. After high winds left us grounded for 8 hours, they accommodated my Party of 4 and helped us all get on another flight together as soon as possible. Due to late arrival at our destination they allowed us to change our flight back to Toronto by a day and had a great conversation with Air Canada staff over phone! Thanks Air Canada!! Cant wait to fly to Spain with you in July!	1
I was scheduled on flight AC 115 to Vancouver on Friday March 2 to give a lecture. After boarding the plane and sitting on the plane for one hour we needed to deplane as there was a mechanical issue. No problem. I asked one of the Air Canada personnel what was the plan. She said they were trying to get another plane. No problem. Then I heard the plane was cancelled so I approached the desk again and this time I spoke with a young man who was fantastic. I explained to him I know everyone has their reason for wanting to get to their destination, I just wanted to know if he could assist me. He promptly looked at the next available flight with a seat and secured me a seat on the 5 pm flight.	1
My daughter and I were on flight AC182 from Vancouver to Toronto. I wanted to thank every person at Air Canada that we came in contact with. My daughter had injured herself skiing and I can’t tell you how kind and accommodating everyone we encountered was. From check in to re assignment of seats to having wheelchairs. The cabin staff were also kind and provided my daughter with ice packs.	1
Vancouver to Toronto. Amazing service and everyone was so helpful and kind.  I had a knee injury and needed assistance. I can’t thank everyone enough for all their help and kindness. I was supplied with wheelchairs and complete assistance. I tried to give the lady who wheeled me all the way to the car pick up area and she wouldn’t take it. The check in lady was awesome to get me a seat that would work for me even though it was a full flight. Thank you.	1
A great flight from Air Canada, returning from Frankfurt to Calgary in premium economy. The majority of my recent flights have been on AC (also flown WestJet, EasyJet, and Lufthansa, I've found that AC compares favourably). Getting on board on this flight, I let my clean-obsession take over. If there was something out of place or noticeably dirty on or around my seat, I'd notice. But everything was neat, tidy and clean. The flight was on time. The cabin crew on AC is usually friendly, but this time I was struck by just how pleasant they were: My request for an extra meal (it was a 21-hour-long travel day for me) was immediately accommodated. The attendant came around in good time and offered more wine to the cabin without people even asking. When I missed the second meal (breakfast wraps) because I was asleep, the attendant brought me two servings to make up for it. When I asked for coffee, the attendant brought a handful of something, saying: 'I didn't know if you wanted sugar-and-cream or Baileys, so I brought both - choose wisely! I chose wisely and went with Baileys - and I'll choose Air Canada again because believe it or not, this kind of service and friendliness is pretty typical on most flights, and I've flown with them on countless times. There have been delays, but nothing not related to weather or maintenance and most delays were compensated by vouchers or flight discounts. In general they're actually a pretty consistent airline.	1
Great service on this Air Canada Express domestic Economy Flex flight, which was on time at both ends. Cabin cleanliness and cabin service were both up to snuff. Prompt drinks service and attendants that made frequent rounds. These smaller Bombardier crafts are only equipped with one bathroom and have smaller overhead bins, but having a tendency to pack light and efficiently, I had a hard time finding fault with the flight equipment. I fly AC always and fly them a several times a year, and I've always been satisfied.	1
Flew Tokyo Narita to Vancouver with Air Canada. Boarding was on time and very smooth. Check in was fast, smooth, and I got the seat I had requested. The plane looked new, was very clean, and crew made sure it stayed clean throughout out the flight. Inflight entertainment was great. Lots of movies and shows to pick from. 2 meals were served on the flight and were quite decent. Best airplane food I have had thus far. I would definitely recommend long haul flights to Asia with Air Canada.	1
I was on Air Canada flight 846, Toronto to Munich on Monday October 23. The flight was smooth as can be and the flight staff were fantastic. Very polite and also helpful. Crew leader was so much fun to talk and the crew made the long flight delightful.	1
Toronto to Ottawa. The Pilot was flying out to Ottawa and overheard my conversation and distress of having to get to Ottawa General as my husband was in a coma. I was not sure where to go or how to get there and was worried about how long it would take till I was by my husbands side. This pilot came over to me and offered to bring me to the hospital once he landed the plane as he finished his shift and was going home as he lived in Ottawa. I want say thank you as I was overwhelmed and it took some ease and stress off me from the flight knowing I would not have to worry how I would get to the hospital after the flight. He was very humble and offered me assistance if I need anything while I was in Ottawa. I thanked him for his gracious act of kindness and want to ensure that he gets recognized for doing such a good deed. Air Canada you have a very special pilot. Thank you so much.	1
Indianapolis to Shanghai return via Toronto/Montreal. A great round trip with Air Canada. This was the first time I flew their Montreal to Shanghai route on the Boeing 787. Exceptional service on their international service. I also had a chance to fly Canadian domestic on the YYZ->YUL leg. Even though the flight was short, the flight attendants did their best to distribute snacks/drinks in a short timeframe to a plane of 150 people. The transborder flights operated by Georgian airways were also good. The entertainment system worked without flaw and the seats were comfortable. No delays in any flights.	1
Short hop from Chicago to Toronto on evening flight AC514. Flight left slightly late due to delays with baggage loading as it was raining heavily in Chicago. Nonetheless, the flight arrived Toronto on time. Check in was slower since there were only two agents at the counter with several passengers in line. Yet, the staff was courteous and was very welcoming. We were eligible for TSA PreCheck so we breezed through security with ease. Cabin crew were present for the duration of the flight with the captain giving updates while waiting on ground in Chicago and upon arrival in Toronto. Drinks were served with refills offered twice through. Custom forms handed out during descent. Quick taxi to the gate upon landing and we were quick to deplane. Bags arrived swiftly and we were out of the airport within 15 minutes of clearing immigration at Pearson. Overall, a pleasant experience and I would use them again on short hops.	1
La Guardia to Halifax via Montreal. Thank you Air Canada for instituting this new (since November) pathway thru customs in Montreal to connecting flights! Now I did not have to wait on a long line at customs with all other passengers arriving in Montreal from NY, but was directed to a separate area for customs for connecting flights only, (brilliant), and when I exited customs I was in the gate area for my connecting flight - without having to go thru security again - brilliant. This saves so much time when one may have only a minimal amount of time to make a connecting flight, especially given regular delays! It is so much better, and truly customer-centred. But can you institute this at Toronto airport, too? And also can u make it happen in the reverse direction in Montreal?	1
Most are accustomed to seeing very negative reviews of Air Canada, but this review is for a flight almost boringly smooth. I fly Air Canada a lot and I've never had an issue. This time was on a red eye from Toronto to Calgary. The flight was on time. It was a rebooked flight and I was given complimentary preferred seats. We landed in Calgary ahead of schedule. The entertainment system had some issues but the 320s are older members of the AC fleet and will be replaced by the new Bombardier C Series soon (looking forward to that). Cabin crew was attentive and gave me extras of things. Would and will fly again.	1
This flight from Sydney (Canada) to Toronto was delayed by several hours due to a mechanical issue. Another plane was flown in and the replacement flight was boarded quickly and underway immediately. Air Canada airport staff was friendly and courteous. We were given meal vouchers and a discount code for a future flight. The plane itself was clean and the flight smooth. No complaints - better safe than sorry when it comes to plane issues (not to mention legally mandated), and they handled it very well.	1
We were placed on this flight from Ottawa to Halifax after our initial connection was cancelled. We were given meal vouchers for lunch, and this replacement flight left fairly much on time and went without a hitch. A short flight in the small Bombardier, served by an efficient and friendly cabin crew. No issues, would fly again.	1
Calgary to Ottawa. A slightly delayed flight was thoroughly explained over the PA twice and the cabin staff was very pleasant in their service, getting the drinks going right away and answering my 'call flight attendant' ring within seconds. Economy seats were obviously not the most comfortable but of course they're not designed by the airline, so it's not quite relevant to reviewing Air Canada. Smooth flight overall - have never had an issue with them on countless flights over many years.	1
I'm rating only the first lap, from Tel Aviv to Toronto. The plane was a new Boeing 787. Fantastic flight, plane was extremely comfortable in Business, auto-dark windows were a kick and also very helpful. Movies and music extensive and very well organized. The food was so-so, but the service was fantastic.	1
I've always flown Air Canada for many, many years, and have actually never had a cancellation, delay, or any memorably negative experience. The flight from Calgary to Montreal left and landed on time, and the aircraft was clean. The attendants were polite and made regular rounds through the cabin, with water or food carts (for purchase, as this was a medium-range domestic flight), or just to check. I was in coach so I had the comfort level I paid for (for those complaining about coach comfort, I hope they realise that coach seats are not designed BY the airlines, and that they are less comfortable than premium or business on any airline). Zero problems on this trip, would (and will) fly again.	1
Flew Air Canada from Toronto to Calgary. Great flight on a clean 787 aircraft in economy. Very friendly attendants: I was sitting beside a couple that was ignoring every instruction. The man was on his phone almost until take off, and neither of them stowed their carry-on during take-off or landing. Despite this, more than one attendant helped them cheerfully. Due to a misunderstanding of when we were landing, I tried to order some food close to landing time. The attendant in my section was polite, explained that they weren't supposed to take any more orders, but then gave me a free sandwich (worth around $6.50 on this domestic flight) to give me the benefit of the doubt. I always have and will continue to fly with AC for their consistent service, polite crew/attendants, and clean/modern fleet.	1
San Francisco to Toronto via Montreal. My husband had a great experience flying Air Canada for our first time. The staff from check-in, flight attendants and captain were all professional yet cordial, ensuring all customers were well treated and comfortable. We had a connecting flight between Montreal to Toronto, with a fairly tight window. The Director of the attendants, made a personal call to ensure the flight would wait for us before departing. Knowing we had to go through Customs prior to changing flights made us quite nervous we'd miss the connecting flight, but the Air Canada staff was quite supportive and helpful, making us feel much taken care of! Of course, they were right, we finished going through Canadian customs and reached the boarding area with 30 minutes to spare.To date this is our favorite airline, and we've been telling our friends and other Tauck Tour travelers how much we enjoy flying with Air Canada. We look forward to flying with Air Canada regularly!	1
Vancouver to Shanghai. I would like to thank the airline employees of Air Canada. I recently took a flight from Vancouver to Shanghai. And left my wallet at the departure gate, unbeknownst to me. Two hours into the flight, an attendant gave me a message from the flight deck that passenger Gagnon had possibly left a purse and box of chocolates at the departure gate. After some confusion, I realized that I did not have my wallet in my purse, nor that chocolate bar that I had bought. My life was in that wallet. And I got it all back complete. Thank you to all those involved!	1
Traveled to Winnipeg to Ottawa 06 Mar 17 and return 11 Mar 17. Check in at both airports was a breeze and ground staff were friendly and efficient. Both flights departed approx. 30 minutes late and arrived approx. 30 minutes late. Seats were comfortable on both flights, and had no issues with the entertainment system. Didn't have to wait long for flight attendants to come around with drinks, and o both flights flight attendants were friendly. Baggage arrived promptly at both airports. Overall, had a good flight on both departure and return and would definitely recommend this airline for short-haul flights.	1
London Heathrow to Calgary. I had a very enjoyable 8 hr flight with Air Canada in economy! Service was excellent. Flight attendants went out of their way to make sure you had plenty of refreshments and plenty of water. In flight entertainment was 1st class showing all the latest films. Seats were comfortable. No delays. I was served a hot meal with drinks of my choice not long after take off and also a hot snack about an hour before landing. Two weeks later on 18th December I flew back to the UK with Air Canada and again excellent service. Only criticism it is a shame they do not offer different films flying east to west/west to east as some other airlines do. Otherwise no complaints	1
Calgary to London Heathrow with Air Canada. This was a good flight that left on time and arrived on time. I took seat 12A in Premium Economy, which felt great compared to coach (which I have typically flown). You get a business class style entrée with a printed menu and choice of entree, and the seats are quite noticeably wider and with more recline. The attendants were friendly and made the rounds regularly without being intrusive. I am definitely a bit of a clean and neat freak, but the plane interior, including the bathroom, was organised and spotless. Upon boarding, we were given a departure drink (I chose OJ). After takeoff, dinner was served with wine. The entertainment system was, as usual with AC, stocked with selections of some recent films. All in all, the flight was smooth and enjoyable. AC gets a lot of complaints that I have never found to be substantiated. I've flown them lots I've never had a late flight and never had a staff member treat me rudely. They have an international fleet of new or new-ish equipment including many 787s and a really good safety record.	1
I have never understood the bad rap that Air Canada gets. I have flown both main Canadian airlines (AC and WJ) lots and without really caring one way or the other, and have felt that Air Canada consistently offers high quality flights and flight service. On this recent flight I was in Premium Economy on a Boeing 787-8. Leg room and seat width in this cabin is substantially better than in coach, and you get the business class meal (china, glassware, and chilled silverware) with a printed menu and choice of main course. The meal itself is noticeably larger than in coach (if you are in coach, remember that you can ask for an extra meal and they are almost always able to give you one - I've done this on multiple occasions). Being an inter-continental flight, you also get complimentary alcoholic beverages in ALL classes. This flight (as well as AC850 from YYC to London) arrived early. The attendants were attentive and friendly, and airplane was clean, and the service was excellent. The Boeing 787 also compare favourably to other planes it's noticeably quieter and my ears were popping a lot less because of the increased pressurisation.	1
Flew Air Canada from Munich to Toronto. Our group travelling together January 3 ranged in age of over 60 to 3 children aged 11 months, 2 and 4 years. All of the flight crew were not only professional but extremely pleasant and caring. Food presentation excellent, entertainment program good and seat comfort fine. Even though pod system the layout does allow for communication amongst passengers - the prior claustrophobic feeling has been eliminated. Pilot "connected" in a very nice way with our grandchildren and all of us too. New Business Class certainly an improvement. Check in process civilised. Only minus is Munich Airport which has long walks and different floor levels to conquer till aircraft position can be reached. Excellent experience and personally I was relieved to be able to state that the whole flight went smooth and enjoyable for all of us - including very young passengers. On a side note - the outbound flight on the 23rd of December was good too.	1
Air Canada, with 2 days notice, advanced the connecting flight from Toronto to Charlotte/USA by 40 minutes, and without asking us, booked us on a flight for the next day. As requested, I phoned Air Canada in Canada and had to wait 40 minutes on the line for an operator. I asked if Air Canada pays / provides hotel accommodation for the stopover, in line with European Union rules. A very rude female operator then told me that this is not the airline. However, something must have rung the bell in Italy, because the next day a very friendly Italian staff called me from Rome and informed me that I would get free accommodation. The flights from Rome to Toronto and back were very pleasant, with good premium economy seats, good service and good food. Entertainment also had been satisfactory on a big screen (the movie selection could be improved). The only terrible experience, outside Air Canada's control, had been the USA security screening and immigration in Toronto. We had to stand 2 hours in line and, despite being ushered forward twice by friendly airport staff, boarded our plane to Charlotte as last passengers 2 minutes after official departure. Many other passengers lost their connections due to the newly introduced stricter security controls for the US. The return flights to Rome were again very pleasant without any incidents. Toronto airport is very efficient and pleasant. 	1
Jacksonville to Montreal with Air Canada - I fly between Quebec and Florida every few months. I have flown with quite a few different airlines and Air Canada has to be my favorite. I have 2 small children who fly with me and staff are always helpful and polite - as well as other passengers for that matter. If visiting Canada, I recommend taking Air Canada if possible - much better than Delta or American Airlines.	1
A 12 hours long Air Canada flight from Toronto to Tokyo Narita and a superb one!  I did not expect much from North American airlines, but to my surprise, I'm giving Air Canada a thumbs up for the flight I travelled. Maple Leaf Lounge was adequate, the shower room was clean and the shower was a satisfying one. The food served was superb and definitely comparable to that of a 5 star Carrier. I had a spacious executive pod to myself with lots of legroom. It was comfortable and I had a great 6 hours rest throughout the flight. The food was okay albeit nothing to shout about.  I would say this is on par with many other Asian Carriers. Service crew were attentive and also hospitable.	1
At the end of March Break, my daughter, her husband, and their 3 and 5 year olds left Orlando on a United Airlines flight to Toronto with 90 minute connection in Newark. The flight out of Orlando was delayed and they, along with 14 other passengers, missed their connection to Toronto. United's solution was to get them on another flight to Chicago, then to Toronto which would get them there 36 hours later! Obviously, the person making that recommendation has never flown with children. Being a Star Alliance partner, Air Canada stepped up and got them on a flight with just minutes to spare, getting in to Toronto before 10 pm. Daughter and 3 year old sat in regular seats, Dad and 5 year old sat in flight attendants' jump seats. Air Canada, I am very impressed.	1
Air Canada from Boston to Vancouver via Toronto. Boston to Toronto was a quick hour long flight on the Embraer 190, which is quite pleasant. Quick layover in Toronto and off to Vancouver in a Boeing 777-200ER. The best plane I'd flown in. So smooth and quite, with a great entertainment system. The food I had was fantastic. 	1
Flew Air Canada from Toronto Pearson to Paris CDG. Exceptional ground staff, spent time in the Maple Leaf Lounge in Toronto which added to our trip experience. Flight itself was on time and the onboard service was excellent. The 787 itself is a great plane. A comforting interior with good leg room and wide seats. Overall a comfortable flight. Only thing missing was a foot or leg rest for our bulkhead seats.	1
Paris CDG to Toronto. Check in counter for Air Canada was quick and noticed that those flying economy had the same prompt attention. Comfort, space and service were far superior to other carriers I have taken on that route. Daytime flight and noticed how the windows dimmed and interior lighting changed. Overall Air Canade is my airline of choice.	1
 from Sept-Îles to Québec. Smooth boarding in few minutes despite the plane was full. Left on time from and Sept-Îles and arrive on time in Québec. Good service onboard for a flight of 90 minutes. A negative point: Price of the ticket is high. I will fly Air Canada Express again.	1
Toronto to Vancouver. Air Canada ground staff in YYZ not as friendly as YVR but I guess it is a much busier station. I again paid $60 extra to book a preferred seat. This time it was 13A on Boeing 787. This seat is in the Premium economy cabin. I was made aware of the fact that this was not *Premium Economy* service as Air Canada does not offer that class of service domestically. It is simply a charge to sit in this section of the cabin. It was worth the money for a 4.5 hour flight. The small cabin is very private, with very generous legroom, seat width and comfort. It also means that you are the first to be offered food and beverage service and among the first to deplane at destination. Buy onboard  choices were in my opinion reasonably priced and a very nice selection. Flight attendants attentive yet realised it was an evening flight and many people just wanted to nap. Two trolley services were offered as well as a couple of water runs. Superbowl was being played as we were flying and the flight deck made two announcements to give the score at the end of halftime and the final score. Perfect, rather than making copious announcements every time the score changed. Cabin crew checking the cabin to make sure everyone was looked after, but respecting the fact that many were sleeping. The only observation I had is that the flight was only approx 65% full yet all the seats in the back 10 rows remained empty. Surely the ground staff could have suggested moving some of the pax to even out the space and make more people more comfortable.	1
Toronto to Frankfurt on an overnight,  checking in was easy with a separate section for Business, Premium class flyers.  Maple Leaf Lounge was great, many seats and tables, plus free food and drink. On this Boeing 777-300, Business has a 1-2-1 Pod style seats.  I found nothing wrong with them. If it was a bad thing, I couldn't sit beside my wife who I was also on this trip, so I sat behind her on the right side of the plane. To sit kinda beside is taking an isle seat but it's no window seat, plus because the pods are positioned in the pod style, being comfortable in your chair would be hard to chit chat to your traveling partner, so it's down to preference. Food was great, and the drinks were non stop. The bed was 180 degree flat bed and comfortable. There were no PJ's provided like other airlines. I am 6ft 2 and did not find it cramped and sleeping was no problem. I did read reviews in advanced that sitting in the last back seat of each section of Business, provides a bit more storage space, and it was true. So if you book in advanced and select your seat, try for these. But overall, no complaints. The flight was spacious, pods give that cozy effect. There is plenty of plugs and sockets to charge your things. However, non North American travelers, if you need a plug, make sure you have your plug converter.	1
I was supposed to fly to Toronto from New York on Westjet but I got stuck in Boston. I booked an Air Canada flight instead and I was very glad I did. Checking in online was easy and I was able to select my preferred seat. At the airport, Air Canada ground crew were friendly, they let me check two bags for free. Boarding was on time and so was the arrival. It was my first time to fly on an Embraer aircraft. I was impressed - I think E-jets have a lot to offer. There was IFE on every seat and the cabin crew were attentive and helpful. Snacks were available and they were tasty. As it was a day flight, I enjoyed the view, especially when we flew over the Niagara falls. I enjoyed the flight and would definitely fly with Air Canada again.	1
We ended up getting caught in the big storm disruption of Jan 22nd during our flight from Saint John, NB to Santa Ana, California. We made it as far as Montreal and our flight on the Chicago leg of our trip was cancelled. Air Canada promptly offered us a direct flight from Montreal to LAX which we accepted. It was a chaotic time and we appreciate so much being able to get to California. We know that many others spent days trying to get flights to their destinations.	1
I would like to commend the staff who helped me on last nights Air Canada flight AC102 from Vancouver to Toronto. I required a wheelchair on arrival and a lovely young women (3 weeks on the job) pushed me from plane door up to the building and on to a golf chart. I was taken by the cart to near Security and told to wait for another wheelchair to take me thru and down to the luggage pick up. But there was a mix up and no one came to wheelchair me on. I waited for over 10 mins and finally I asked for help and they asked me my flight number. After a few minutes the same girl who had assisted me from the plane took me to luggage and also out to the garage to get to my son's car. She was so wonderful to me. She was quite tiny and I am a large elderly women with severe arthritis. I don't know how she managed to move me up hill so easily and cheerfully. I forget her name but she was such a wonderful guardian angel when I needed it most. Please pass on my thanks and gratitude. She should be commended.	1
The flight left Québec on time and arrived on time in Ottawa. The two flight attendants on board were friendly and offer a professional service. The seat were confortable and the plane clean.	1
Air Canada from Calgary to Ottawa via Toronto, a red eye flight and was excellent. FA's took care of everyone. Drinks and snack after take off and then breakfast prior to landing. Nice to see the red eye menu has expanded to multiple offerings rather than just the omelette.	1
Air Canada from London to Toronto, and really impressed. First flight with them and the staff, service and aircraft were exceptional. Good was great. Seat configuration and room was good for economy. Entertainment was working and a good selection available. The food quality was great for economy - we were seated in one of the back rows but still had all choices of foods available. Plenty of complimentary beverages and choices. Will be flying Air Canada again.	1
Recent surgery required wheelchair assistance for my Columbus to Vancouver via Toronto trip. I was not prepared for the excellent level of attention that I received from Air Canada. All of the ground crew efficiently transported me through the terminal, boarding, disembarking, immigration, etc. The flight crew provided me with extra ice for icing my foot during the flight. I was quite worried about my level of comfort during this Air Canada trip. I am pleased to say this was one of my best experiences in air travel. 	1
We took a trip from Sicily to Los Angeles, and the last leg of a trip was from Montreal to Los Angeles with Air Canada. I received my boarding passes with an assigned before leaving in Rome, however, as I was checking into my LA flight the staff notified me that she moved our economy seats to first class! I was too tired to thank the attendant properly. If this review will reach them, I just want them to know that you are a huge blessing! We were stationed overseas for 6 years and this trip was bringing us to a new military assignments. This break of being treated extra special just really made my day.	1
Air Canada's new 787 Business Class turned out to be a definite improvement over all its other "pod" aircraft. The suites have lots of room,huge TV screen,massage function, and really private which is nice if flying alone. The service was great and my only beef is the hot meals could use an upgrade as well. I fly business class all the time with Air Canada and the meals don't ever seem to change. All in all I am really pleased with Air Canada business class and especially the new 787 service. I am the same guy who gave Air Rouge bottom marks so I felt when an airline does a good job it deserves mention as well. I can't wait for my next 787 flight which is coming up next month.	1
I recently traveled YWG-LHR and returned home from EDI-YWG with AC Rouge. I must say I was pleasantly surprised with how well the trip went in both directions. Outbound flight was delayed about 2 hours due to maintenance, staff kept us updated and were very pleasant. After the aircraft couldn't be fixed they quickly changed to a spare Boeing 777 in YYZ and got us going as quick as they could. Meals on board were not bad, only suggestion would be the continental breakfast could be improved. Seats were comfortable and service was good even though a full flight. Returned on Air Canada Rouge in Premium, seat was adequate, food was good but flight attendants need more training and need to act more professional. Priority bag was first off the carousel and connection was perfect, flights on time no complaints.	1
My wife and I live in the U.P. of Michigan. On May 19th we flew out of Sault Ste. Marie, Canada to Toronto then to Frankfurt, Germany then onto Helsinki, Finland. Our return trip after spending time in Finland visiting family and	1
YUL-LHR-YYZ-MEX in Economy. It is always a pleasure to travel with such a professional airline. Cabin crew members are always really good. I did the YUL-LHR on May the 7th and I was on one of the newer Boeing 777-300ER with 3x4x3 abreast economy class. The cabin was new and spotless, seats were really comfortable and inflight entertainment was excellent. Service was really good, but the second meal was only a very bad slice of cake. LHR-YYZ was on an older 777-300ER with 3x3x3 abreast economy on May 26th. I could not perceive any difference in width between the inbound and the outbound flights. Most of the cabin crew on board this flight were the best AC bunch I have had in a while, there was one that was very nasty to a passenger whose English could not be understood easily. Finally, the YYZ-MEX leg on an Airbus 319 was a breeze as the cabin was almost empty. I had encountered the CSM working in this flight before, and I have to say he does know how to co-ordinate a team. Air Canada does not offer free meals in its flights to Mexico anymore, but I prefer them over the competition because they are a no-nonsense airline with hard-working.  	1
AC761 to San Francisco AC 760 to Montreal. May 26 - June 2. I flew from Montreal to San Francisco on May 26 The plane was clean and the staff were really friendly and experienced. The entertainment system had some good selections. Overall its was a great flight my only complaint is that this is a 6 hour flight yet they still make you pay for food which I find is not fair since I flew Montreal-London in December and its a shorter flight yet you still get a meal.	1
FRA to YYZ. Business class pods were wonderful. We fly these several times a year. The new Maple Leaf Lounge at FRA was beautiful! The food was fresh and plentiful power outlets were readily available spacious and the showers were excellent. The lounge is right on top of the departure gate resulting in a easy process to board the plane. Flew a 777. Pods were clean FA's were attentive and pleasant bathrooms were clean food was excellent for an airline and flight was uneventful (the way it should be). I am *A Gold. Fly AC mostly and most flights are pretty boring. Flights arrive and depart on time. Only one time in the past 12 months did my flights get cancelled or delayed. In this single case Air Canada had me rebooked quickly.	1
Traveled YYT to MBJ for holiday. The YYT to YYZ leg was Air Canada main YYZ to MBJ was Rouge. After reading the many complaints about Rouge service I was on the lookout for problems but did not find any. Excellent service on both trips with a very attentive cabin crew. On the return leg from YYZ to YYT we were unable to land due to fog and had to return to YUL arriving at 2.30 am. Air Canada gate agents met us in the terminal with hotel and meal vouchers and informed us that a new flight for us would be departing at 9am and we received our luggage quickly. We opted to not got to the hotel as it would be a short stay so we checked back in and waited in the Maple Leaf Lounge. We reported for boarding at 8.30am but were informed that due to weather at YYT we would be delayed until 11.30am. Air Canada agents handed out meal vouchers and we returned to the lounge. Flight departed at 11.30am and we arrived YYT without incident. Overall it was a great experience and we would definitely fly Air Canada again. The delays were unavoidable as no airline controls the weather but we felt that Air Canada did everything they could to keep us informed and comfortable throughout. I should add that we were loyal Westjet customers until this year and harboured a dislike of Air Canada before this trip but we have definitely changed our opinion.	1
YUL-FRA April 2015. A330 was in good shape. I like the arrangement of Air Canada's business class I am tall and find their lay-flat bed system to have plenty of room unlike some airlines. Staff were friendly and attentive. Food service was good.	1
LHR-YUL April 2015. A330 was in good shape. Very comfortable seat/lie-flat bed. Not a super long flight and they offer 2 meal services I couldn't do the second as I wasn't hungry. Staff were friendly and attentive. Flight arrived 45 minutes early nice bonus. Lounge in LHR is nice connected from Copenhagen and had to change terminals I thought I was walking to Canada pretty long hike.	1
Flew YDF-YYZ-PVG in Economy. Although I usually check-in online I did so at the airport since it is a small airport and I had luggage to check through to Shanghai. Staff were friendly and efficient. The first flight was an A319 from Deer Lake NL to Toronto which was comfortable and had a great selection on the AVOD. There was food for purchase and complimentary drinks. For the Toronto-Shanghai flight boarding was relatively efficient despite being a full flight. Take off was on time and the same AVOD was available. Seats although small were comfortable. Beverage service began 45 minutes after take off accompanied by a small bag of pretzels. Supper was served approximately 1.5 hours after take off which consisted of either a pork or chicken option. I had the chicken in cream sauce with roasted potato carrot and green bean. Also each tray had a corn and iceberg lettuce salad a white bun and brownie for dessert. It was quite decent for airline food and certainly not the worst I've had travelling. The wine selection was decent too. At the halfway point a Nissin cup of noodles were served with a chicken finger sandwich on white bread with a pack of biscuits. Finally there for breakfast there was a choice between congee or eggs and sausage. I elected for the mushroom and chicken congee which was quite good. It was accompanied by melon and a white bun with jam and butter. Overall it was a good experience and the flight arrived smoothly and promptly in China	1
I live in Cleveland and fly to Paris twice a year. I fly Air Canada through Toronto. Yesterday my flight from Paris was delayed by an hour making my chance of making connecting flight to Cleveland very slim. I went to the Air Canada desk to try and get a seat on a later flight and the customer service agent helped me make the earlier flight by walking me to the front of the customs line the (to me unnecessary) security line and then the immigration line. Without her I would have had to wait an additional 2 hours.	1
Just finished my flight from EZE to YQB with Air Canada's two cabin 777. It was a wonderful flight. After the stop in Santiago the fresh crew took care of all details. Although SCL is not the best kitchen in AC's network the food was good. The service was efficient but not rushed. It allowed for the cabin to go in sleep mode fairly early on in the flight. I don't understand AC's decision to move away from the two class config pods. They are comfortable and for me 6'1 a welcome lie flat experience. Slept very well and woke up just in time for breakfast. Hats off for this 5 star crew! Seems to me AC is working hard on maintaining and potentially increasing their service standards.	1
YVR-YUL-YVR Flights on time FA's were all very nice and friendly. They offered us water maybe 4-5 times during the flight. Nothing bad to say about them.	1
Flew on AC33 and AC34 both flights were fantastic. Sat in seat 19c on both legs of the trip and the extra legroom was worth the money Got to Sydney and back home safely and customer service was excellent. Will definitely fly with Air Canada again.	1
AC835 YUL to GVA January 21st 2015 Airbus A330 seat 38D. Not a very full flight so I was able to sleep on four empty seats. I skipped dinner but had breakfast (coffee orange juice slice of banana bread). Arrived in Geneva ahead of schedule. Cleared customs and collected my checked bags in record time.	1
YYZ to BGI return were both excellent flights. Attentive service great food snacks and lots to drink. The flight attendants were constantly replenishing whatever we were drinking. Flight to BGI was delayed two hours for de-icing but I just lay back on my fully flat bed. Coming home the weather was better so there were no delays. The lounges were good too as we enjoy the lattes at the Toronto lounge. The Barbados lounge is a bit more sparse but thankfully the air conditioning was not cranked up this time.	1
YYZ to YYC on a pristine 767 good cabin crew lead by an impressive bilingual flight director. Impressed by the improvements to the food offerings. YYC to YLW on a CRJ with an outgoing friendly flight attendant. Good flights good service.	1
LHR-YYZ YYZ-YOW YOW-YYC YYC-YYZ YYZ-LHR. Each flight was fantastic. The long haul flights were flown on the 777-300 with the standard Executive Pods they are a favourite of mine. The food was fantastic on all the flights Air Canada has recently started a "room service" style breakfast on flights to Europe. You get an order card and tick off everything you want at night before you go to bed and in the morning have it delivered at your chosen time. Great new idea. Staff onboard were fantastic as usual. Can't wait for my next trip!	1
AC flight 85 YYZ-TLV in business. The flight was flawless service was excellent food was good to excellent. The AC 787 is an amazing product well designed and comfortable. Missing overhead bins in the center above rows 4 and 5 made for a few uncomfortable minutes as we boarded - flight attendants should anticipate this and be available to help. The seat is excellent long enough and wide enough. Yes the foot well is narrow but I got comfortable and slept deeply for 4 hours (same issue on Swiss United ANA). The pillow and comforter are far better than those offered by United Swiss Lufthansa. The adjustable cushions make it the best Business seat I have experienced. Topping it all off is the 18" screen along with a well designed hand controller with its own fully functional LCD touch screen.	1
Toronto - Tel Aviv - Toronto B787 Dreamliner. Executive First. Aircraft is superb and is now my favoured choice over the B777. Innovative numerous improvements in passenger comfort and convenience. Cabin staff really proud of the aircraft and it shows in their service. Flights left on time and arrived early. Concierge at Tel Aviv personally accompanied me to my seat (a first). Overall a thoroughly enjoyable experience on both flights. A thumbs up to a great new aircraft and a motivated and delightful crew.	1
24 July YWG-YYZ. I was leaving on an early morning flight on July 24 2014 and had a serious fall onto my face just as I was leaving for the airport. I arrived at the Air Canada check-in in pain and shock. I was greeted by the most caring and compassionate ticket agent who immediately called the medics. They got a wheelchair and ice packs for my face and accompanied me through customs after clearing me for travel with the on call doctor. They gave me extra ice packs for the flight to Toronto and the flight attendants gave me a bag of ice to rest my face in and constantly checked back to check my comfort. Empathic and caring flight attendants.	1
YYZ-YEG Full flight. Overall a great experience from web check in to early departure and early arrival. Great service by friendly cabin crew. Clean plane. Terminal 1 at YYZ easy to use. Air Canada has WestJet beat.	1
I have just recently completed 2 return trips YYC-YYZ in Y class after a number of AC rouge flights and have to say I felt like I'd been upgraded. Flights were comfortable entertainment had a great selection right at my seat and I didn't have to download an App to watch 30 yr old movies. Inflight service was good lots of overhead cabin room and the best part - adequate leg room! I am still a fan of AC but really hope they do away with AC rouge asap. It's bringing the AC brand image down to a very low level.	1
I travelled premium economy on Air Canada from Vancouver to Heathrow. This product is very good value in my opinion. Seats were similar to AC domestic standard business class about 38' or more pitch two on the sides. The dinner meal was a condensed business class meal in my opinion having travelled in that class previously. The wine drinks service was excellent staff were very attentive. Morning meal more standard fare but fine. Air Canada has come a long way in service over the past few years and I would definitely choose them over any American carrier and many European ones. I thought the dinner meal was better than what I ate on united first class. UA could take lessons from AC.	1
AC865 LHR-YUL B777-300ER full flight and expectations fulfilled. Great plane seats comfortable for a 7 hrs flight IFE is superb with new touch screens (like ipad) good variety of movies music and series selections food OK pasta was delicious however the wrap snack was nothing special perhaps an ice-cream would have been a better option as we're in summer now. Staff very dedicated and attentive always smiling passing through the cabin quite often for water services and more. Amazingly enough it was my first time on an intercontinental AC flight and I got very satisfied with this experience.	1
AC 613 July 6th from Halifax to Toronto and AC 716 Toronto to NYC (LaGuardia) on July 6th. Ground crew and FA's were both excellent. Aircraft's on both flights (Airbus 320 and E-190) were very clean and well maintained. Cannot find anything to fault. Will fly Air Canada again without question.	1
I flew from Toronto to Sydney Australia via Vancouver. The flight was very comfortable. Sure the seat could have been roomier but there was adequate leg room. The leg from Toronto to Vancouver was great no one in the middle seat! And because I was continuing on to Sydney I got free food (a choice of a meal item and a snack). The food on the long haul leg was okay nothing special but edible for myself. Free bar service is nice! Service was good and water was plentiful. I think Air Canada's seat back TV is best in class. Lots to choose from when you can't sleep! The only think I wish Air Canada did differently is get rid of 3x3x3 seating and make it 2x4x2. Yes less seats overall but it would make it a more pleasant flying experience for all!	1
Vancouver to Victoria on 16 June 2014 a 20-minute flight aboard a Dash8-300 connecting from Lufthansa. As I was leaving the Vancouver immigration and customs hall personnel of the Canadian Border Services Agency directed me to the wrong exit. Hence instead of going through a dedicated security line for passengers connecting to domestic flights I found myself in the main airport arrivals area bringing all my checked baggage with me even though it was tagged to Victoria my final destination. I asked an AC staff member driving an electric cart whether there was somewhere to drop my checked baggage or whether I should head for the domestic check-in queues. The airport wasn't busy she confirmed that my baggage was already tagged to my final destination and she had no passengers in her cart; so she took me directly to a separate counter (with its own conveyor belt) used for wheelchair passengers accepted my already-checked bag and issued my boarding card. Excellent treatment by Air Canada staff. (As it was a 20-minute flight it had no food or entertainment.)	1
Flew from Vancouver to Toronto in business class on a brand new 777-300. It had the brand new business class and it was excellent. Great staggered layout and single seats are amazing for sole travellers. Very comfortable in lie flat position and new duvet and pillows great quality. Excellent meal service and lovely staff. Would love to fly on this again.	1
Travelled AC 001-002 YYZ-NRT B777-300. Two class layout with the classic pods herringbone layout. Always love these layouts. Flew round trip June 5-11. Everything was excellent. Always impressed by AC service. Went to bed as soon as we took off and opted for the dine on demand service instead of the regular meal service. Crew made sure everything stayed warm until I was ready to eat. The food was great for 35000ft up. Bar service always great never have to worry about not having anything to drink. Usual breakfast before landing was so so. Only recommendation would be to time the meals for the time of day. We landed at 5PM continental breakfast at 3pm isn't exactly exciting but its better than nothing. Crew were fantastic always attentive asking if they could you anything else. Seats super comfy. Air Canada just introduced a new duvet and pillow with the launch of the 787 and they are super comfy. All in all great product.	1
I was a little concerned about flying with Air Canada after reading some of the negative reviews on here but I should never have been. I flew on flight AC851 on the 18 May 2014 and I have to say the cabin crew on this flight were absolutely great they were helpful friendly and cheerful in their work and nothing was too much trouble. They made our flight enjoyable! Food was good for an airline seat comfort was good and although there were some delays before take off this was due to Heathrow ground staff and no fault of Air Canada.	1
Flight 165 from Montreal to Calgary. The crew were impeccably dressed which can make or break a first impression. I was seated in the economy cabin directly behind business class and was expecting a standard North American carrier style of service but instead received more. The business class flight attendant was sure to make sure my drinks were always topped up and even went as far as to refer to me by name a very pleasant surprise in economy. The flight crew were friendly and present throughout the entire flight. Multiple water runs occurred. Legroom was generous in the bulkhead row and the cabin was clean and fresh. The inflight entertainment system was also up to date with multiple options for programming. I will certainly fly Air Canada again.	1
Flew AC 883 CPH-YYZ you certainly get back what you give on AC. I always decide to treat the crew like gold smiles and thank you and you get that back. AC 883 was about half full to very lucky to have two seats aisle and window all to myself. I greeted the crew with smiles and they immediately offered my double food two desserts and about an hour later one member brought me a tray with bread and cookies I immediately went to the back and thanked them again. Flight was an ageing 767 but saviour these old birds as you'll never again get the incredibly comfy 2-3-2 configuration again on the 777's and 787's. My one complained on these old planes is the seating near the exit rows gets extremely cold colder then when these planes were new.	1
Las Vegas to Calgary and return in December. Overall excellent. Planes spotless in flight entertainment great food (taste and presentation) was the best I have experienced on North American carriers Canadian wine offered a nice touch. Captains on both directions provided updates and information. Great flights.	1
Flew Vancouver to Sydney November 2013 in a 777. What a great experience. The most space I've had on a long haul flight. Service was efficient and friendly and price was very low. Only slight criticism was the food which was pretty ordinary. All in all though I have no hesitation in recommending Air Canada.	1
Traveled with a group from YWG-YYZ-DFW in Economy. Slight delay in YWG due to weather but they made up time and only arrived 15 mins later than scheduled. Easy connection and on to DFW with AC Express fantastic crews both ways clean and comfortable E75's. Return departed DFW early and into YWG on time. Excellent experience crew were all friendly would gladly travel with AC again.	1
YEG-YYZ Oct 2013 and YYZ-YEG Oct 2013. Both segments were on-time and overall great experiences. The IFE is top- notch staff service was great and overall a very professional service. But a little frustrating that people that upgrade with points get service before people that pay for the ticket. When I was flying to Brazil it was not this way.	1
We flew from Paris to Montreal in the newly reconfigured business class and were amazed. We loved the new seats so comfortable modern and top of the line. Service and food were a delight they've come a long way.	1
I recently travelled from Calgary by Air Canada. to Salt Lake City through Houston Texas. The flight attendants could not have been more helpful and pleasant. My connection at Houston was tight. Unknown to me they arranged for me to move to the front of the plane so I could be one the first to get off. I was in a wheelchair. The airport worker in Houston dropped the ball and did not take me to my next gate as arranged. As a result I missed my connection and had to wait until the next day to get to Salt Lake City. Air Canada had I felt gone out of their way for me.	1
YVR-YYZ and YUL-YVR I had a great couple of flights and AC continue to improve their service. Breakfast in the Lounge was great in Vancouver as was lunch in the lounge in Montreal. The FA were a friendly crew and very attentive. In particular a woman serving us on our flight back to YVR was great. I appreciated the selection on the IFE and they made the 5 hour flight go by quickly. I fly AC regularly and the staff seem much happier these days. They even switched aircraft from a 320 to a 321 as they has so many passengers heading to Vancouver.	1
YYT-LHR 11 Oct 2013 and LHR-YYT 21 Oct 2013. Both segments were on-time and overall great experiences. My only complaint with AC is the lack of legroom in economy (I'm 6'2) but I've come to expect this. The IFE is top-notch staff service was great and overall a very professional service. It was fun to cross the Atlantic in an A319.	1
Flew on Embraer 190 from SFO to YVR and have to say that the FA was absolutely the best I have experienced. Service was top notch. Had no problems with the inflight entertainment system either. If you are going to be flying executive first on EM190 try and book a seat on the left side of the cabin since you will have the half of the aircraft to yourself.	1
FCO-YYZ Sep 25th. Instantaneous check-in quick security very good food 20 minute luggage arrival and an incredibly good crew. We have flown over 200 flights in the last 10 years on 14 airlines and this was the best crew ever. The premium seats were a bargain.	1
LAX-YYZ upgraded to executive class. Number 1 staff in the industry. AC still holds standards high for FA appearance. This crew was most professional and looks the best in North America. Keep it going AC and you will get awards for North-American airline on top of your international awards. IFE didn't function in my seat staff however did everything possible to keep me comfy.	1
Had a very good experience flying from London Heathrow to Toronto via Chicago on 23/8/13. Everything from booking the flight customer service before flight and during flight checking in boarding aircraft comfort on board good connecting service and the same on direct return flight everything was great. Competitive price as well.	1
Reykjavik to Akureyri. I have never been on a friendlier serviced aircraft than this! Absolutely wonderful flight, only 35 minutes, and quite a unique experience on a propeller plane. Absolutely love the onboard "travel journal" where you can read other passengers adventures and write your own in, very sweet! Would love to fly with them again next time I'm in Iceland!	1
Egilsstadir to Reykjavík. Check in was a breeze. Waiting area very clean. Boarding was very easy just showing ticket and photo ID. It was a 45 minute flight. They served tea or coffee with a chocolate. I really enjoyed the flight as I did not want to travel by road again. I will fly them again.	1
Frankfurt to Verona. The plane had very nice livery and very nice design inside. Air Dolomiti colors are very nice. There was very clean inside. After boarding cabin crew gave out refreshing towels in business and economy class. The crew was very friendly and helpful. Air Dolomiti has very nice in-flight service, you can choose between cold drinks, hot drinks, beer and very good wines served in real glasses in economy and business class. There are also some biscuits and sandwiches, but it depends on the flight. IFE was also very good for such a short journey, every passenger can connect their phones to Air Dolomiti WiFi - there are information about the current aircraft position and some videos about Italy. Every travel with Air Dolomiti is travel in Italian Style. I highly recommend!	1
Turin to Munich. Punctual, immaculate plane, comfortable seat, wine served in glasses also in economy. The staff is kind, offering more snacks on request, smiling. All great. Puntuale, aereo immacolato, sedile comodo, vino servito in bicchieri di vetro anche in economy. Lo staff è gentile, offre più snack a richiesta, sorridente. Tutto ottimo.	1
Gothenburg to Munich. My flight was a Lufthansa flight operated by Air Dolomiti. I would say that Air Dolomiti makes a better job than the elder brother. The ground crew was helpful. Our flight delayed 35 minutes because of the weather conditions and we were informed by the cabin crew or by the pilot every 5 mins. They served a hand sanitizer napkin before the meal (I only experienced this on intercontinental flights) and the complementary meal service was the best I have ever got on a short haul flight (a tasty sandwich with chocolate cookies, coffee and orange juice and wine). As final before the landing we got a jelly candy. The seat comfort and the cabin temperature were great, the cleanless is very satisfying. The cabin crew was kind and helpful, they got to know my next gate number because of my connection and the delay before the landing and they showed me the gate on a map. The flight was smooth in spite of the horrible weather conditions. Nice job Air Dolomiti! The best domestic airline in Europe!	1
After a fraught day missing a flight from Paris CDG and being rerouted to Genoa via Munich we boarded a well presented Air Dolomiti aircraft only to hear a message from the Captain that there would be a 20 minute delay waiting for passengers from Amsterdam. After they eventually arrived he again came on the intercom to say that he realized we had a cruise liner to meet and he would expedite the flight - and he did flying it like a light aircraft to reduce a 90 minute flight to a 48 minute flight - congratulations to him! The cabin crew were 3 smartly dressed young ladies and the purser was almost in tears when she was the one to tell us that our luggage was not onboard. The snack was, rather strangely, a cellophane wrapped apple but they insisted on us having a second Prosecco "to cheer us up". Then when we landed they came to assist us with our baggage claim - service indeed!	1
One of the best airlines I have flown with. We flew from Riga to Frankfurt with Lufthansa, and then from Frankfurt to Verona with Air Dolomiti. The flight wasn't long, about 1hr 10 minutes. The flight attendants were friendly. I would recommend.	1
LH1964 18 Aug operated by Air Dolomiti. Great service. We were offered very tasteful tramezzino. FA offered 2 or 3 drinks and tramezzino rounds.	1
MUC-FLR in February 2014 in economy flight was full. Plane was clean-although economy was pretty cramped flight staff was pleasant and professional. Air Dolomiti even gave us a snack and a drink on this short flight. Arrived on time. Would recommend (they are part of the Lufthansa network we thought we were booking a LH flight when we booked). Enjoyable experience.	1
I had a pleasantly smooth flight. Service was excellent plane spotless plenty of sparkling wine to keep me company during my flight from Turin to Munich - I wish they flew out of London as well as I would go out of my way to use this company.	1
Venice to Munich en route to Toronto 26 October 2012. Arrived at Marco Polo at 5.30 am for 8.45 am flight. Smooth check-in with two young staff members assisting passengers. Our slightly overweight suitcases accepted without comment and no surcharge. Informed our flight was delayed 2 hours (which would have caused us to miss our Air Canada connection in Munich) but we were being put on the 7 am flight which was boarding shortly. Sent past the long line for security check as Priority passengers and loaded on the transporter minutes later. The ATR7 my first non-jet flight took off on time with a full load. Almost immediately we were served a tasty cake with cappuccino by a smiling attendant. Began descent into Munich 20 minutes ahead of the scheduled flight time. A comfortable plane excellent service friendly staff efficient processing.	1
Flew Business FRA-BGY-FRA on the same day. Total cost of 180€ return. Service was excellent food was fresh and tasty (cheese ham and fruits on the outbound salmon on the inbound flight). Cabin crew was always smiling. Definitely recommended.	1
BLQ-FRA in a nice and clean Embraer 195. Loved the interior colours. Good service onboard and very friendly. Tasty snack on this 100 minutes flight.	1
My flight was to Milan from Toronto and return. Check-in was fast, the crew were polite and efficient on the ground and in flight. For the most part both of my flights were on time, just on the way back there was a delay of 2 hours but Expedia had informed me through e-mail 2 days prior of my flight. I was pleasantly surprised regarding the meals served on board to and from Italy, not only you can choose from a menu but the food was delicious! Also I found that choosing the option to pay for checked baggage on Air Italy site was much cheaper than paying at the airport, I paid in Canadian dollars instead of euros. I usually fly with Air Canada but Air Italy was much cheaper in comparison. The only thing that I would appreciate is that when choosing the option to pay for my checked bag online that it would indicate "1 checked baggage included" at time of booking. The flight was smooth and very pleasant. I will definitely fly with Air Italy again in the near future.	1
Toronto to Naples via Rome with Air Italy. A very nice experience! The cabin crew were probably the most professional and friendly that I have experienced in many years. Completely bucking the trend of surly, and cheap service that most airlines seem to be offering now-a-days. The aircraft was modern, clean, and comfortable - plenty of leg room! The meals were excellent with nice snacks and fresh beverages. Even the entertainment was very good. The airport personnel wer also very efficient and friendly - altogether a very good flying experience!	1
New York JFK to Milan. I flew Air Italy for the first time and thoroughly enjoyed the experience. The customer service was outstanding. My cabin attendant was fantastic. Anytime, I requested something or asked a question, she was patient, knowledgeable and most kind. Normally, I fly business class but was not available since i booked my flight 2 days before departure. I felt like I was in business class minus the bed. Also, the first officer introduced himself to me and told me to ask for him if needed anything. I have never had a pilot introduce themselves and offer their assistance, that's first. Hats off and well done.	1
Los Angeles to Milan. Customer service great. Both by telephone thanks to the excellent and patient Mrs Nardina who helped me get all the information regarding my special assistance. I also wish to commend the treatment received at Malpensa airport by Air Italy Supervisor and staff assigned to check in, who distinguished themselves for their kindness, speed and determination in managing my problem, being the undersigned disabled at 100%. As did the check-in attendant at Los Angeles airport. Same treatment for the return. In my numerous flight experiences with different airlines, I had never received similar treatment. I add to what I wrote the great availability, kindness and desire to work of the aircraft crews, in particular the steward. Really top. Servizio Clienti meridiana air Italy Ottimo. Sia telefonico grazie alla bravissima e paziente signora Nardina la quale mi ha aiutato ad avere tutte le informazioni inerenti la mia assistenza speciale. Ci tengo inoltre a elogiare il trattamento ricevuto all'aeroporto Malpensa da parte del Supervisore Air Italy e la signora  addetta al check in, che si sono contraddistinti per la gentilezza, velocità e risolutezza nella gestione della mia problematica, essendo il sottoscritto disabile al 100%. Così come Mrs. Sharmilla addetta check-in dell'aeroporto di Los Angeles. Stesso trattamento per il ritorno. Nelle mie numerosissime esperienze di volo con compagnie aeree sempre differenti non avevo mai ricevuto un trattamento simile. Aggiungo a ciò che ho scritto la grande disponibilità, gentilezza e voglia di lavorare degli equipaggi degli aeromobili. Davvero top.	1
Yangon to Nyaung. My wife and me flew three routes with Air KBZ over our holiday in Myanmar and we got outstanding service every time. The cabin crew all have excellent presentation and are very courteous and attentive. We had a cold snack, tea and coffee, all of which were very tasty, on all flights. Its unusual to be given cream cakes at 8.30 am, but they were very nice. All aircraft used were very clean and in good condition and all flights departed and arrived exactly on time. Air KBZ is way better than we expected.	1
Flew Air Italy from Milan to Rome. Wonderful new airline with brand new airplanes. Cheap tickets, but great service on board. Even got a complimentary drink and snack. Very comfortable seats with adjustable headrest, even on our short flight. Also one of the cleanest airplanes I have seen.	1
Excellent Service. Always on time. Good seat quality and leg space. Best cabin crew in response, service. Very good healthy food. Good luggage handling. Excellent take off and landing. Very good check-in assistance and best service.	1
Doha to Mumbai. Excellent Service. Always on timw. Good seat quality and leg space. Best cabin crew in response, service. Very good healthy food. Good laugage handling. Excellent take off and landing. Very good check-in assistance.	1
My trip from Dubai to Mumbai was excellent. The flight was on time got my luggage in Mumbai on time. They had a young and efficient crew. The snacks provided were fresh and water was provided free (this is a budget airline). Dubai to Mumbai flight alcohol was served at a very reasonable cost. Return flight no Alcohol served don't know why? My return flight was delayed because of bad weather condition. I was notified on time which helped me spend 3 hours more with my family. The journey was pleasant and safe helping me have a enjoyable holiday.	1
Honestly can't fault Air Koryo - their 1-star rating is completely unjustified. I've had worse flights on Malaysia Airlines Turkish Airlines and British Airways. I flew PEK-FNJ on a modern Tupolev-204 and both check-in and boarding were faultless. We departed on time and the cabin crew were courteous. Free food and drinks were served and the safety demonstration was very professional. Once we arrived in Pyongyang immigration took 10 mins and bags were delivered immediately. I'd definitely use them again.	1
Flew a total 8 sectors between Beijing Pyongyang Chongjin and Sondok onboard IL-62 IL-18 Tu-134 and Tu-204. Flights were all on time. Good English spoken onboard and a full meal service on 1.5 hours between Beijing to Pyongyang. All baggage delivered promptly with no delays. Planes are maintained well.	1
Only flew internal flights (3 legs) on AN-24. Drinks (beer or cider) provided on the 2 longer legs. No IFE. FAs spoke reasonable English and were friendly. No safety demonstration and the overhead bins were just overhead shelves. I like the way you can push the empty seats all the way forward (so they lie flat) in a half-empty plane it's a good option for more leg room! There is no choice flying domestic in DPRK but Air Koryo provided good entertainment.	1
Beijing to Pyongyang return. The plane was clean and well presented. Check-in service was impersonal but satisfactory. The food was good. Both flights left and arrived right on time. A shame the airline doesn't fly more routes.	1
We have just returned from Johannesburg via Antananarivo to Nosy Be on air Madagascar. All of our flights were on time. We found the airline to be extremely reliable the planes in good condition the staff extremely efficient and friendly. We shall certainly recommend Air Madagascar to all of our friends travelling to Madagascar.	1
I flew with Air Europa from ZRH to EZE via MAD in Business Class. The experience was outstanding. Flights on time, excellent business class hardware product specifically the new and super comfortable business class seats on the Boeing 787-9, outstanding meals on the long haul flight from MAD to EZE (incl. best coffee ever served on a plane), very attentive and motivated cabin crews. All this at an amazing price of CHF 2,950 per PAX (and booking was rather short notice in December 2022). I usually only fly Swiss and Lufthansa on routes to South America but I have to say Air Europa is much better in Business Class and at the same time their pricing is by far better. Air Europe can definitely count me in going forward.	1
Had 4 flights in total with Air Europa Munich -> Madrid -> Marrakech and back. All flights arrived ahead of schedule, carry on luggage rules were far better and some other airlines, one regular carry on 10KG plus a little bag it was the first time for me with this airline, before COVID I used to fly a lot for work and leisure with quite a couple of airlines and was positively surprised by this airline. For me its ok to get no drinks for free on the plane, its most important that the flights are on time and this was always the case. Seats were also comfortable, you even could lean backwards a bit, which is not possible anymore in some other low cost carriers.	1
Excellent in all respects. The food is brilliant, best ever had on an airline. Comfy lie flat seats, friendly and attentive cabin crew.	1
Overnight flight Miami to Madrid on Air Europa's new business class. Excellent in all respects. Ignore old reviews. Their business class is now one of the best amongst European carriers and strong competition with worldwide carriers. Far better than Iberia or BA. Best food ever had on an airline, comfy and roomy lie flat seats (I'm 6 ft tall), lovely and efficient cabin crew throughout the whole flight.	1
I expected the worst due to reviews on here, but was pleasantly surprised with Air Europa. Check in was done through my phone the night before the flight, boarding was a breeze, the flight itself was completely packed. Crew were pretty straight forward and courteous. No free drinks onboard but i managed to buy some OJ for 3 Euros. My ticket included a carry on item plus my backpack. Glad to have chosen Air Europa for this flight. Inflight entertainment was turned on for the full flight.	1
Air Europa is not as bad as people suggest. With budget airlines I am a great believer that one should start at 10 and take of points for what you don't like rather than with "posh" airlines the opposite. Bought my one way ticket for around £150 worth of airmiles so cheap as chips and consequently in fairness I should rate this airline with consideration to the fare paid. I've read reviews about Air Europa and feel like I must be flying a different airline. Check in was efficient and both members of staff were very helpful. I got given an exit seat at no charge (I am skyteam elite plus this probably helped). Air Europa use the cibelles lounge in T2, I had a very nice lunch in a relaxing setting before my flight. Boarding straightforward, plane new and clean. Flight left on time, we are scheduled to arrive on time. Meal was basic but tasted good. Reasonable selection of drinks, I am not an expert on wine, I guess it was cheap but was fine, the little dessert was delicious. Staff are friendly on this flight. Seat was old fashioned but consequently more comfortable than others I have sat on recently. Entertainment also not the best but some good films on a nice screen. So starting at 10 where do I dock points? I don't like they charge for ear phones but the next cheapest flight was a 100 quid more so money in the bank to pay 3 euro for earphones. There simply is nothing wrong with this flight so I am going to give it a ten.	1
Moscow Domodedovo to Chisinau. I've been using services of Air Moldova already for 3 years and I have a very positive impression. Airplanes are in good condition, come on time and the service is great. Especially, I would like to point out excellent work of online help service of Online Booking. I made a mistake choosing the date of flight and noticed it only after order has been placed. The operator gave me a fast reply to my email and was very friendly and helpful, so we could correct the date to the right one. So the problem was solved within minutes. Excellent work! Totally recommend to use this airline.	1
Chisinau to Brussels. Bought an Economy Basic ticket for a family member but at the last minute had to suspend it due to emergency situation. It ended up being that we no longer needed ticket suspension and it was restored via emails with customer service. There was no extra charge and customer service representatives were very professional and prompt in their response. Thank you!	1
Dusseldorf to Sao Paulo via Madrid. I read some negative reviews and was very pleased to have a great first experience with Air Europe. I will book again for sure! Very nice and welcoming crew, who are flying great machines (Embraer E-190 and Boeing 787). Charging fees for check in bags, choosing seats and extra meals is nearly industry standard procedure and I do not understand why people give negative reviews because of this.	1
I very recently flew from Frankfurt to Chisinau and I was once again extremely pleased with all aspects of the flight! My flight was operated by an Airbus A320 and was fully packed with passengers. The seats were very comfortable a warm breakfast was served excellent both in quantity and quality! The aircraft however lacked in-flight entertainment. Flight attendants seem to have significantly improved their command of the English language and are also very kind and helpful! The plane took off and landed on-time. The Captain of the flight kept us informed about flight conditions several times throughout the journey. Finally I would definitely recommend flying Air Moldova.	1
KBP-KIV. The check-in at Air Moldova was very quick as there was no line. Baggage weight allowances were very strict since we were flying on a small 30 seater Embraer 120 Brasilia. Onboard we were offered complimentary drinks and croissants and even though the plane was small the seats were very reasonable. The flight was kind of shaky but it made the plane ride down to Chisinau very fun. We promptly received our baggage after clearing customs. In conclusion Air Moldova is a fantastic airline!	1
Punta Cana to Gatwick via Madrid. When I initially booked with Air Europa, I heard mixed reviews and was worried. Having travelled with them, both outbound and inbound, they are a great company. Some budget airlines could take a leaf from their book. The staff were so polite and helpful. Nothing was too much trouble. We had a long journey both ways and it was the easiest journey I have ever travelled. The luggage transfer was seamless and waiting at the destination with no trouble. Any questions asked to cabin crew were answered with manners and excellent customer service. Thank you Air Europa for making a long haul flight so much more enjoyable.	1
I am very impressed and pleased by Air Mauritius. The aircraft was very modern and well equipped, and the service was amazing. I have never experienced so welcoming and attentive service during a flight. Additionally the food was amazing. I usually do not enjoy meals on flights that much but this time it was delicious. Well done! I am hoping to fly with you guys again one day.	1
Very good service, seat is okay. I cant make any remarks because its economy. Good staff and prompt. Airport staff at check in wonderful, kind and speedy, and 30kg checked in baggage + hand luggage.	1
We travelled on Air Namibia after our travel company arranged substitute flights to Victoria Falls due to our Virgin Atlantic plane being delayed from London resulting in us missing our connection. Virgin were very unhelpful offering a new flight 2 days later! The trip with Air Namibia was excellent from start to finish. The crew were very friendly on board, the food was nice. When we landed at Windhoek the ground staff were very helpful ensuring our bags continued the journey and we were kept informed.	1
Cape Town to Windhoek. Overall it was a very pleasant flight experience. The staff at the check-in counter were very helpful to change us to our desired seats because we had to check-in at the webpage of another airline (codeshare). The seats were comfortable with an average seat-pitch. On board were three options of meal: Chicken, Beef and Fish. We had forgotten to order a vegetarian meal. But the staff prepared us a vegetarian mean from the sides of the other meals. In generall al staff of Air Namibia, with whom we were in contact were very friendly and helpful.	1
Windhoek to Frankfurt with Air Namibia. The ground staff were helpful to assign us the desired seats. The plane was quite new and provided a modern entertainment system (unfortunately with a smaller selection of movies compared to other airlines). The seats were comfortable with a usual seat pitch. The crew were friendly and helpful. During the flight were three choices of food offered (Chicken, Beef and Fish).	1
Right now, Iberia Regional - Air Nostrum is serving the Madrid - Frankfurt route. I was very happy with their service and the quality of food, beverages in their Business Class. The service was quick and very attentive throughout the flight and even the coffee served was very fresh and tasty (which is usually not a strength of Iberia). Despite of this narrowbody aircraft, seating was comfortable and in Business Class, the seat besides you will be left empty. I can really recommend you this Business Class service on this route with Air Nostrum.	1
Madrid to Granada. Excellent. Efficient and attentive cabin crew. Arrived and left on time. New aircraft and comfortable seats. Straightforward boarding and disembarking. Highly recommended.	1
Madrid to Lisbon. I feel very happy about my experience with Air Nostrum. The flight was cheap,  ground service was fast and helpful. The pilot and the crew were very kind. The seat was comfortable and the choice and quality of food and drinks was good and convenient.	1
Frankfurt to Windhoek. I was surprised by Air Namibia. The airline offered a super service and you could watch many movies, the service of the cabin crew was great, the stewardesses have skilful English and German which helped. Generally a very good airline for the budget.	1
I did a day-return flight from Amsterdam to Madrid on Air Europa who uses a one-way pricing (even for business class) so a same day return is more attractively priced than other carriers that offer business class. Air Europa also operates this route with a wide body A330 where others use narrow body aircraft. On my outbound flight to Madrid I was on a A330 with a 'newish' club seating, which has 4 rows of 2x2x2 seating, the seats are slightly angled towards each other and there are individual entertainment systems. I found the seats comfy but not very spacious. On the return I was on an older A330 that offers only 3 rows of 2x2x2 seating (in the same space as the newer A330). I loved the older A330. Seating is so classic and spacious and the seats are hugely comfortable. There is no individual entertainment on this aircraft. My outbound flight was delayed by about 1h30 and I found the Air Europa app to give conflicting information on the actual departure times. On the return the app told me the flight would be delayed, but it did leave in time. Where Air Europa really stand out is on its club catering. Incredibly fresh and healthy: beautifully presented. Hands down the best catering on an inter-European flight. Cabin crew were absolutely lovely too. Extremely friendly and present in the cabin. I noticed on expert flyer that business class would be almost empty and appreciated the airline did not fill this section up with upgrades, friends and family at the last minute as many other airlines do. So all in all it was a perfect day in the sky.	1
During this Air Namibia flight, I received exceptional service from a flight steward on SWO714 between Cape Town and Walvisbay on 7th December 2015. He went the extra mile to help out with a difficult situation. I noticed on the steps to the aeroplane that I had left one of my hand luggage items in the restaurant in the departure lounge. This was a tragedy for me because the item was a very large framed photograph (shown below) I had taken of my son-in-law, and was meant to be his Christmas present. The steward immediately offered to find out whether it could be retrieved but there was too little time left before take-off. Later on he gave me a cell phone number to enquire with assurance that something could be done. When I phoned that number the following morning, I had little hope of any success but to my surprise the steward himself answered the phone, told me that the picture had been found and will be kept safely until my return from Namibia on 27th December. I ask him if there was any chance of getting the photograph to Walvisbay, seeing that it is a special Christmas present? He said he will see what he can do and will let me know. That very afternoon, I could pick up the picture from the Walvisbay airport – what an incredible service.	1
In the last past years Air Namibia has improved a lot the service and it's a very affordable and worthy airline. I flew from Windhoek to Cape Town several times this year and the service was very good. Staff were friendly and food quite good as well drinks. Since 2013, Air Namibia has improved and I strongly recommend.	1
Alicante to Madrid with Air Nostrum was a very good short flight. Checked in a few days before on line and got emergency exit seats at no cost.	1
The plane was in a good condition even for an old plane. Both flights were on time. On the 50 minute flight there was no service. Staff of the airline were professional and quick at check in. No e-check in.	1
Malta to Bristol. The staff were friendly and professional nothing was to much trouble. Seating was very comfortable and the aircraft clean. Impressed with the complimentary light snack and bottle of water. Prices of the inflight service were reasonable. I would highly recommend flying with Air Malta one of the better airlines I’ve flown with.	1
Malta to Gatwick. The experience was pleasant. Staff are very friendly and hospitable. Even though Air Malta moved into the low cost market, service is as great as before.	1
Flew business class with my wife and 20 month old toddler to from Windhoek to Cape Town and back. Both flights left on time and boarding was pretty quick even though the flights were pretty full. Onboard service was extremely good. The flight attendants were very friendly and helped with the little one where they could and made the flights a very relaxing experience. They are using relatively new Airbus A319 which were clean and comfortable. Food was good but this usually is the case with Air Namibia on all their flights. No on board entertainment on the flight but for 1hr 50 minutes this was not a problem.	1
MAH-PMI return on ATR72. Both flights on time crew good. Prices seem steep for non residents of the Islands. Used Iberia/BA airmiles so only paid tax.	1
28th August 2013 I took a flight from Malaga to Melilla. I found the ground staff to be very professional and well turned out. They were welcoming and conducted their duties with pride. The flight was on an ATR aircraft which is ideal for the relatively short flight from Malaga to North Africa. The flight departed on-time and the cabin crew conducted a safety demonstration. Bizarrely one of the cabin crew showed the food to purchase card but then said there was nothing to buy! The flight was suitably comfortable and arrived into Melilla exactly as per schedule. Disembarkation was well managed and orderly. Overall I had a good impression of Air Nostrum. The tickets though seem expensive.	1
Paris to Mauritius. Amazing experience compared to my flight from Toronto to Paris. Smooth flight with a very soft landing. Amazing on board staff providing caring service. Food was excellent and breakfast superb. I am very proud to see the effort which is put by the staff to make the trip for passengers remarkable. Thank you for ensuring excellent customer service provided to travellers.	1
WDH-JNB. Flight departed on time food was good and service very professional. Seat comfort for a short-haul flight excellent! Boarding in Windhoek could be better. There was no priority counter. As with SAA passengers from Eco should not be allowed to use the toilet in Business class. The flight attendants should see to this.	1
Windhoek-Cape Town Business. Good boarding perfectly on time. New A 319 with extremely comfortable Business- seats (2-2 configuration new seats with plenty of rooms). Breakfast was good flight attendants very attentive and checking on the passengers. On time arrival. Can't get better than this flight and price was reasonable.	1
Had a very pleasant experience on my flight from Frankfurt to Johannesburg via Windhoek on the new A330-200. Check-in swift and friendly staff. Boarding easy. Departed on time and arrived 30 min ahead of schedule in Windhoek with a 1 hour layover going to Johannesburg. The new A330 is very pleasant seats are very comfortable and was able to sleep for most of the time. Will be using Air Namibia on my future trips.	1
MAD-VAL-MAD. A very satisfactory flying experience with flights leaving on time. Nice comfortable leather seats well turned out and friendly cabin crew who saw to the needs of my grandson by providing a colouring book and pencils. Light refreshments and newspapers were also provided. A pleasant change from flying budget airlines.	1
Frankfurt to Windhoek and continuing onto Cape Town three days later - economy. Easy check in at Frankfurt and smooth boarding. Old plane but comfortable seating and pleasant food. No individual entertainment system - just the overhead screen. All staff very helpful and pleasant. Had special deal to upgrade on Windhoek to Cape Town flight for only $600 Namibian dollars. new plane with plenty of leg room and comfortable seat. Great service again. Pleasantly surprised all round and flights left on time arriving early in both cases. Recommended.	1
My wife and I flew SW709 Windhoek - Cape Town on 3 June 2013 in Y/C. Brand new and spacious Airbus A319. Our flight can only be described as excellent! Extremely friendly and attentive crew full of fun and humour with passengers. Full service Dinner was a choice of 4 heated meals! Beef-Chicken-Fish or Vegetarian - very tasty. Flight attendants kept the wine freely flowing! Suggestions to their Cabin Services would be to change their brand of coffee (awful) and to issue disposable earphones to watch the in-flight drop-down movies instead of routing it through the PA system. All in all a great airline and a great crew flying the Spirit of Namibia.	1
Rarotonga to Aitutaki. The flight with Air Rarotonga was a pleasurable experience: spotless clean aircraft with much space for legs, an excellent and friendly service, coffee was served on that short flight on the small plane and even the small airline's brochure and a daily newspaper was offered to read by passengers. I was impressed by the overall quality of the service.	1
My partner and I recently flew from Rarotonga to Aitutaki. The flights are 40 minutes each direction. Well, what a professional airline. A full service was conducted with complimentary tea/coffee/water. Buy on board items offered. Cookies were $2.00 and value for money. The only flight attendant was professional and courteous. the aircraft was immaculate. Seat space rivals some international airline's premium economy offerings. These flights were very pleasant. This airline is a great ambassador for this idyllic part of the world.	1
We were traveling to Mauritius for my sons wedding. It started off a nightmare leaving Melbourne on a Qantas flight - we had so much terrible boarding the plane, as there was a mistake made with my name on my tickets (different from my passport). After a few hours of stress trying to resolve the situation, and the stress of not knowing whether I could board the plane, it was resolved.. In Melbourne they said I would have problems in Perth when I board Air Mauritius. At Perth we went to the Air Mauritius counter fearing the worst. It was not the case. A beautiful lady there helped us. She made us feel at ease right from the start, even had a little joke with us, and she fixed the problem straight away with no drama. She also gave us an upgrade - we were blown away! Thank you Air Mauritius.	1
Malta to Milan Linate - I frequently travel with Air Malta. It is a comfortable option and offers really good prices. Usually flights are on time, cabin crew are very friendly, I really like the fact that bags fly free and Air Malta gives you also a free snack (bottle of water and baguette). Will use this airline in the future.	1
The best airline I have flown with. Everything was as expected for business class. The seats were to die for! I actually slept and I never sleep on a plane. The flight crew was excellent and the landing was the best I’ve experienced. Definitely recommend flying with them.	1
I took return flights from Gatwick to Malta for a short vacation and was happy with service on both flights. The onboard and ground staff were polite and helpful. I appreciated the checked luggage allowance and the free onboard snack, something you often don't get in economy. The prices in their Sky Bar Menu for paid for food and drink were very reasonable also. 	1
I requested assisted boarding and seats together for my disabled husband and I, and they sorted it all within 24 hours. We found the Air Malta cabin crew very pleasant and efficient. The snacks of a ham and cheese roll and bottle of water may not have been a cooked meal, but were more than other airlines provide. Tea, coffee plus other drinks were offered for sale, as were snacks. All in all I found Air Malta excellent. We will fly again with them next year, hopefully.	1
Papeete to Los Angeles. We left for Polynesia just before Covid-19 blocked North America. Our flight had more than 150 empty seats. The plane was very clean, very welcoming, very colourful and the service on board was impeccable! But the 5 stars is especially justified with our return flight. We had to return to Canada long before our planned return and having bought our tickets through an agency, it was up to them to make the changes. It goes without saying that the agency was completely overwhelmed and therefore unreachable and of no help! So we called ATN and spoke to 3 different people, all 3 were kind, patient and helpful than the others! In the end, we were able to dodge our agency and modify our tickets free of charge, for the same evening. In these times of crisis, even the staff at check-in and onboard were very welcoming and helpful. Congratulations to the entire ATN team and thank you for your quick and efficient service!	1
Flew Air Europa from Madrid to New York JFK. The cabin crew were some of the friendliest crew I have come across. They went out of their way with a smile, patience and humor. I had a personal health issue and had to exit the aircraft asap upon landing and they completely understood and offered to get me assistance upon exiting the aircraft. Couldn't have been nicer.	1
Lisbon to Madrid. Very good service for a short flight. 50 Minutes with an amazing service for Business and great food. Good service on board also vs competition. Seat also with great space in the first row. Magazines and newspapers (not available in TAP for example).	1
MLA-LHR. Flown Air Malta many times but this was by far my best experience. Same price as flying Ryanair. Crew very courteous breakfast was standard and impressed that a European airline still serves hot meals. Only downside in my opinion is that the aircraft are showing their age on the interior in particular the seats. They are only 10 years old but a cabin refit would have been of more benefit to the airline than the paint job they all had lovely though it is.	1
We flew from London to Mauritius and Mauritius to Perth. We had our 16 month old daughter with us and the staff were great. Food was ok seats comfy. The land staff even gave us 4 seats for 3 of us from Mauritius for more comfort.	1
I'm just back from Malta having flown out and back from London Gatwick. Both flights departed promptly after smooth check in and boarding and arrived on time. Flying Airbus the seats were wider than I have experienced on recent economy flights with other airlines. The staff were friendly and the absence of attempts to sell unwanted items was appreciated. The provided means were pretty average but it was much cheaper to travel with them on my route than with Easyjet where food would have been an extra. I will certainly use them again and it is clear from a number of conversations that they have deservedly won many regular customers among the expat community.	1
1 Sep LHR-MLA KM101 Business class. 10 Sep MLA-LHR KM102 Business class. Great service and smiles from all seats very good for short haul food very good row 1 A and C both directions. Business lounge great and very quiet.	1
Flown from KL to Cape Town and returned via Air Mauritius. Stopped over in Mauritius. Flown 26/12/13 and returned 1/1/2014. Although seats are cramped and very narrow the service from the air crew was excellent and food all the way was very good. We have a family of 10 and no complaints re inflight services. The only complaints we had were the ground crew at Mauritius airport being slow and a little unpleasant. Ground crew at Cape Town were good and polite.	1
Abu Dhabi to Hong Kong return using Air Seychelles. The journey was made easy by the service provided by the air crew. The food was nice there was a decent selection of drinks and the seats were comfortable. I would travel with this airline again and I would definitely recommend. I am a Gold card holder with Etihad and was initially dubious about flying with a connected airline.	1
Papeete to Los Angeles. We really enjoyed flying with Air Tahiti Nui. The staff is very nice and helpful. The seats are colorfull, the screens are good quality with recent movies. Everything is free onboard. We really recommend this airline.	1
As regular visitors to Malta we have always flown with a different airline but this time we decided to fly with Air Malta mainly because this year Air Malta was a lot more competitive on price than our usual airline. We flew out of Manchester to Luqa on 6th October and returned 13th October. After the excellent service we received we have decided to be regular travellers and look forward to booking in the near future.	1
LGW-MLA. At the risk of sounding like a record stuck in a groove this was the fourth Air Malta flight in two weeks which went very smoothly and efficiently. Check-in at Gatwick was instant and the revamped fast track facilities were as they should be. Plane left on time and arrived 15 minutes early. Service was friendly. Only gripe is that if you are sitting in row one there is nowhere to put ones bags as the overhead lockers directly above them are used by the crew necessitating stowing the bags slightly further down the plane which is a particular nuisance when disembarking.	1
We travelled AUH/SEZ/AUH April 2013. The flights were both excellent. On time comfortable and with enthusiastic cabin crew. Even addressed by name in economy class!	1
Flew JNB-SEZ and return. On both ways we had the same aircraft an older but very well maintained A330. The seats in economy are very comfortable and the service and catering were outstanding. Even the toilets were cleaned several times during the flight. Only the inflight entertainment could be better but I had my own iPad.	1
Flights in economy from Johannesburg to Abu Dhabi via Mahe on 27 March. On time excellent service comfortable seating and adequate entertainment. Was a joy to travel with them and transfer at the Seychelles airport easy. Airport is old and small - just a short walk to plane - not much to do there but fine for transfer. Highly recommended. Disgraceful service.	1
Manchester-Malta return. Very good flights cabin interior comfortable and clean. Drinks cost a lot less than the low cost airline. Cabin crew were attentive not obtrusive. I have travelled with Air Malta for twenty two years and find them to be the confident option.	1
FRA-MAL on Airbus A319. Flight on time crew were very friendly and smiling. The food was very tasty and consisted of chicken with mashed potatoes and a delicious cake. All in all I was very impressed with Air Malta.	1
We had to travel to France from Gatwick to catch our flight. Staff are warm friendly and helpful. I have never come away from a flight thinking how awful it was.	1
I flew Air Seychelles (code share with Air France) Business class from Paris to Mahe. I regularly fly Business and I have to say on this particular flight the service was as good if not better than many of them. The crew were very good the service was excellent and the food great. Beds were 95% flat (not enough incline to notice). Even the comfort pack had organic creams and oils flower essences etc. I cant comment on the entertainment as I worked and slept most of the flight but I remember being impressed with the overall service from beginning to end. I flew again a week later again in Economy which seemed about average in comparison to other airlines.	1
I flew to Mahe from London Heathrow via Milan. Everything was done on time and service was excellent. Crew were friendly and took great care of my sick mother thought the flight. I really enjoyed the flight and will recommend the airline to anyone who wants to travel to the beautiful Seychelles.	1
Just arrived back to Heathrow from Malta. Everything went like clockwork very attentive friendly cabin crew great in flight food free newspaper. Recommend flying with Air Malta every time beats the competition.	1
Rome to Malta. I've flown Air Malta many times in the past but haven't for quite a while and was surprised to discover it still provided meals and drinks for such a short flight unlike most carriers. The flight attendants were friendly and attentive. The flight departed and arrived on time. There was a hitch at the airport with the departure gate changing and passengers not told - I think this may have been the fault of the airport not the airline. I have flown other airlines in and out of Malta before and have had problems but have always found Air Malta to be the most reliable.	1
I went to Zurich and back from Belgrade on 25.12.2021. and back on 31.12.2021. The cabin was clean, the staff was nice, the toilets were clean and the seats were good for a 2-hour flight. The flights were on time. Economy standard tarrif was about 130 euros return which was super cheap.	1
Since my sister moved to live in Malta over 14 yrs ago my family and I have enjoyed twice yearly trips to Malta from Birmingham Airport. Having always flown with Air Malta all this time and enjoyed the experience apart from the odd delay on departure I was shocked to find out that Air Malta no longer fly from or to Birmingham Airport. Why is this? Now we have to make alternative arrangements to travel elsewhere (other destinations other than Malta) as we were spoilt by Air Malta and their professionalism care and attention to their passengers young and old.	1
I was flying from Moscow during these hard times, and the Russian Authorities made it complicated for the airline to depart. The plane was about 5hrs late and everybody missed their connection. Air Serbia gave us a hotel, restaurant access and a packed breakfast for those leaving early. They really went out of their way.	1
Third time I have travelled London to Malta with my family. Flight was excellent food fine and staff very helpful.	1
Melbourne-Sydney-Port Vila-Melbourne. Flew Qantas to connect with flight to Port Vila. Old style seats in Business with not much recline but not a real problem for a 3hr flight. Service was excellent with a choice of 2 main courses for lunch and drinks were promptly offered. Cabin crew were typically Vanuatuan - smiling and courteous and they really seemed to enjoy their job. Inflight entertainment was interesting the first time around but then repeated well into the flight! Perhaps they could upgrade this aspect. A word of warning when checking in at Port Vila for a flight out. Checked in 2 hours prior to flight for Melbourne but then kept waiting for security and immigration to open the door for nearly 45 mins in a very warm (non-airconditioned) airport. Lounge at Port Vila mall but at least air conditioned but only packets of chips to eat. Overall it was a most pleasant flight with a great crew on all legs.	1
This is not the first time I flew Air Serbia, but it was the first flying business class. One thing that none of the people complaining about broken wheels (I had those broken by Lufthansa and never saw a refund either!) are saying is that Air Serbia seems to be one of the very few airlines in the world respecting the safety distancing rules that airlines are supposed to obey but do not! All the middle seats on our flight, both in the Economy and Business class were blocked. After flying Air Serbia in December I had to fly Turkish, AeroMexico, Avianca and Viva Colombia and none of them had this policy - we flew as packed as ever. So, hat down to Air Serbia for going this extra mile and flying half empty planes in order to make passengers safer during the pandemic. Every other aspect of our trip was just fine: there was a wonderful lounge with free food in Belgrade, which we used before the flight, the big meal on the flight, we flew safely and comfortably, the crew was very kind and polite, our luggage made it, and the touchdown at Istanbul was like landing on cotton. I could not wish anything more from an airline. Thank you and keep up the good work.	1
NF 50 and 51 VLI-AKL return. 23 and 30 Oct. What a pleasant surprise to fly with a good old fashioned full service airline very punctual good service drinks trolley nice lunch with more wine top up round of drinks then choose of port or liqueur. Only problem is that the airport is hopeless and can't handle a full plane load for either arrival or departure. Leaving was a nightmare.	1
Fight from LAX to PPT. After a full day of US flights from RDU to MSP to LAX we were quite exhausted. A couple of those flights were late and the older planes were packed. So we were hoping for a change of pace on our 8.5 hour flight from LAX to PPT - and we were not disappointed! The A349 was impeccable. We were in coach but the seats were roomy the flight staff was extremely friendly and we had brand new inflight entertainment systems (I think the entire cabin had recently been redone). The experience got our first trip to French Polynesia off to a great start. Yeah it's still tough to sleep in coach seats but the great experience made it bearable. And of course there's nothing like waking up having a good French breakfast and landing in Tahiti with the anticipation of a luxurious vacation ahead! You really have no other options for flying to Tahiti but who cares - Air Tahiti Nui rocked it!	1
Flew economy round-trip Los Angeles - Papeete. Flights on time on nice aircraft. Economy seating is good and inflight service was excellent. Although aircraft are the same on the return flight got an aircraft that had been reconfigured with their new seats and touch screen videos and was quite nice.	1
Flew Port Vila to Auckland on NF50 flight departed on time and arrived 25 minutes early. Food was great for breakfast and the crew were very friendly. The crew are excellent and always willing to share their experience with you. Fantastic little airline and I look forward to flying with them again soon.	1
Brisbane to Santo and back in August 2012. Flight slightly delayed due to 'missing spare part'. Service on board very good and smiling good food good beverage selection. Same applies to return flight although it was slightly scary to see that your luggage does not get x-rayed in Santo: a smiley woman asks you to open your bag and performs a visual check. Would travel again as friendly and efficient and reasonable prices.	1
Business Class from MUR to Paris. Usual great service. Clean A340. Crew very pleasant and smiling. Wines and food was ok. Seats aren't the most modern but plenty of space and very comfortable. Left on time and arrived 10 mins late. This is a late flight so they quickly serve dinner then close cabin down for the night.	1
LAX-PPT Business Class. Great ambience nice tropical feel as soon as you step on the plane. Normal modern business class seats (not the newest 100% recline ones but plenty of leg room and comfort). Food was very good as well. I recommend flying with them.	1
Punctual, good service with a cookie and drinks on this short 55 min flight. Flying on the 70 seater E170 made this flight less stressful, recommended	1
Just travelled to and from Mauritius in business class. Service was excellent. Nothing too much trouble for Cabin Crew. Very good comprehensive menu. Comfortable seats. Able to sleep comfortably both outward and inward journey. In flight entertainment a little limited. Otherwise very good.	1
Paris-LAX The plane was immaculate staff friendly and food was fabulous! We were given a menu two hot meals and snacks during the flight. If we needed something else we were able to go to the galley and ask for ice cream or drinks at no charge. It was a long flight from Paris to LA but it was very comfortable and didn't feel like 12 hours because of the service.	1
Concerned to read such varied reviews about Air Europa. Our flight from London Gatwick to Madrid was incredibly well priced and compared to the easyJet flight that we took the week before, the seat was wonderfully comfortable and reclined. Staff did not noisily promote consumables throughout the flight. The crew were very well dressed and charming and the landing in both directions was faultless. Ground staff were courteous and efficient. One of the best cheap flights I have ever taken.	1
We bumped up to first class for our 37th wedding anniversary. From beginning to end, on our 14+ hour flight to India, Air India did not disappoint. The entire cabin crew was very friendly and welcoming, including the pilots. Tenzen, our flight attendant was awesome in every way. She made us feel like family. We will definitely be using Air India on our future trips. See attached photos of our sweet anniversary note, cheese cake and champagne! They didn't have to do any of it. Very special memory indeed.	1
Boarding was done efficiently with Sky Priority/Business passengers allowed on first. It was a nearly-new A350 and looked immaculate. We were greeted by enthusiastic cabin crew and shown to our seats. I have always taken the view that there is always at least one thing wrong with any business seat but not on this occasion. It was extremely well designed with an excellent screen, solid table, privacy, ample storage spaces and the ability to locate switches and power points without searching too hard. We were offered a glass of champagne, juice or water before takeoff and given a very impressively comprehensive menu. I had pre-ordered the fish and it was incredibly tasty and excellently served by the cabin crew. I chose the delicious Chablis which seems to work well at altitude. It is an overnight flight and after the meal lights were dimmed. Although it was a flat bed seat I always believed that one sleeps better if it is at a slight angle – especially as aircraft never fly exactly horizontally. Despite only a blanket and pillow I had one of the most comfortable nights ever on an aircraft. I was awoken from breakfast and shown the omelette. This, I knew, never works that well but it was still tasty and accompanied by bread and fruit. Throughout the flight the cabin crew were absolutely excellent. Every request was answered and they were friendly, funny at times, very French (of course) and a credit to the airline. I have been flying regularly since I was four years old and this was easily one of my best experiences – well up to the standard pioneered by the Middle East airlines.	1
I booked premium economy because I have knee problems. The seats are just OK (shell type that slides down but not built for a person over 6 feet), and the food is the same as economy, although it was the best fish I ever had on a plane. Overall, a very decent product, and the flight was on time. They lost my luggage, so I did not have winter clothing as it was summer in South Africa. I bought what I needed for €240 and Air France reimbursed me within 10 days. Overall, very satisfied and impressed by the no fuzz reimbursement.	1
An item was left in the seat pocket after the plane arrived at SFO. The Air New Zealand (lost and found) employee located it and quickly assisted us. She was efficient and went above and beyond to help us. We were extremely worried about getting it back. Thank you to the Lost and Found Department!	1
LAX-PPT-AKL-LAX Economy return. The flight from LAX to PPT was cancelled. I was notified about two weeks before the flight was supposed to leave. I was a bit peeved as the flight from LAX was a connecting flight and the cancellation meant that I had to overnight in LA and take the next flight the following morning. I explained my situation to Air Tahiti Nui and they put me up in a hotel (Four Points by Sheraton)and gave me dinner and breakfast vouchers! The flights were all on time plane modern plenty of room for economy. I'm 5'11 and was comfortable for the entire trip. The inflight entertainment is not as modern as it could be its not on demand but the movie selection is good and there is a nice selection of recent releases. One note of caution try to avoid any stopovers in Tahiti that will be longer than two hours - the airport is old and boring and there is nothing to do while you wait not even a TV to watch. The food was superb for economy and inflight service by the attendants was friendly polite and professional. Topping all of this off is the fact they were $700-$1000USD cheaper than ANZ Qantas or United.	1
Excellent Service by all the crew especially Priti, Riya. The plane was clean and tidy. Amenities were from Tumi even the pajamas were from Tumi. Food variety and the way it was served was amazing. I don't consume alcohol soI don't know about that part but I appreciate the attitude of the crew, their willingness to see the comfort of all the passengers was top-notch.	1
I flew recently to LAX and back in Business Class. Its nice being recognized as a regular Air New Zealand customer. The crew on both flights worked tirelessly making sure everyone was sorted and comfortable. The meals were superb and give you the option to add extra items depending on which main course item you choose. The WIFI was fast and I was able to stream video. Snacks were available in the galley, all NZ manufactured items. In both cases after I went to the bathroom after dinner, I came back to find my bed had been nicely prepared for me. A special shout out to the Air New Zealand Ground Manager at check in at LAX's Terminal B.	1
The plane was spotless and very well maintained. The service was very elegant and welcoming. Food was almost as good as in a good restaurant. I felt very welcomed on board. I will fly AF in C again for sure. It was a wonderful flight.	1
HAM to CDG and return. Two short hops of 70 min each. Purchasing ticket and options via AF app was a breeze. Same for online check in. All was easy, clear and working well. At both airports I used self-serviced bag drop-off. You come to the unmanned kiosk, scan your boarding pass, then it prints your bag tag, you attach it to a bag, place the bag on the belt, scan the tag and your bag is checked. At both stations it didn’t take me more than 3 minutes with zero queuing time. At the same time queuing to normal check in desks would have taken good 20 minutes (also quite bearable if you arrive on time). My first flight was delayed by 1 hour. The delay was managed perfectly. Push notification and email on the mobile phone with new estimated boarding time and gate number, instant update of the boarding pass via app and proper announcement at the gate. Inflight information on missed and rescheduled connections was sufficient and clear. In the air they have managed to serve small snack with round if drinks (tea, coffee, soda, beer, wine). I purchased inflight internet access. The price was ok, speed was fine for browsing websites. If you need just messaging you can get a free plan for the whole duration of your flight. Cabin was clean and fresh (brand new A220) with reasonable comfort. On the way back it was HOP (regional subsidiary of AF) with older E190. Embraer fleet have no onboard internet access, but otherwise they are more comfortable with wider seats and more legroom. Service standard was identical to AF mainline with super friendly and professional crews. HOP flights use 2G terminal at CDG which is a small regional terminal located afar from the main area where all big terminals are. It requires a separate bus ride in addition to rail or bus city link, so mind it and allow extra 20 minutes if you’re leaving from there. On my flight to Paris baggage was on the belt within 30 minutes after disembarkation, when in Hamburg it took around 20 minutes to deliver bags.	1
This was a code share with Singapore Airlines from Paris to Auckland and on the return Auckland to Singapore leg SIA booked me on Air NZ. After flying 2 legs in Singapore Airlines premium economy the Air NZ seating was vastly superior, both comfort and space. Same 2-4-2 seating but in each row of middle four there was one seat empty so the configuration in the middle was actually 1-2. After reading so much bad press about Air NZ it was a surprise that the cabin crew made a huge effort to walk around the premium economy cabin and introduce themselves to each passenger by name, there was also a hot towel. But what made the Air NZ premium product vastly superior was the friendliness of the crew, they made an effort to replenish drinks and chat to customers and provided excellent service! Now the management of Air NZ need to catch up with their crew and improve their EU website which is a disaster, I actually tried to book this trip on AIR NZ but the website was useless.	1
Milan to Belgrade. I flew with Air Serbia many times and never have any problems. Now they selling food druring the flight just like most of the airlines. The airplane was nice and clean, the crew always friendly and the departure was on time and arrival also. We have a great sunny day to fly so everything went perfect.	1
Glitch with agent put me in regular window seat, instead of paid exit row. Although plane was near capacity, flight attendant went to great lengths to find me an aisle seat and overhead space for camera equipment. Just after take off, one of my ear buds became dislodged and fell to floor. I was not able to find it for duration of flight. After everyone else deplaned, I searched to no avail, and was about to quit the search. 3 flight attendants joined the search, and one of them found missing ear bud 4 rows behind my row. The pair retails for $250! I thanked her profusely, and offered to send her a photo gift. I hope she replies. This flight crew was very professional, positive and engaging.	1
Our flights with Air Transat are seamless and pleasant. We traveled to Cuba this year after 3 years of Covid. The staff were so helpful and accommodating. We came home on Valentine's Day and our grandson gave Valentine's cards to the flight attendants and was allowed to give the Captain the same once the plane arrived in Toronto. Our luggage arrived in Cuba without issue and also back home to Toronto. I can't even express enough what a pleasant experience we had. Air Transat will be our go to airline when traveling.	1
Both flights punctual, infact we arrived 10-15 minutes early both times. Friendly professional service.	1
I was very fortunate to fly business with Air France, first Toronto to Paris, after being bumped by WestJet, and taking a flight a few hours later, which was excellent. Then even better was my flight Paris to Vancouver, with the lovely and very efficient flight attendant. I felt her performance alone deserved attention for how special it was. The food and wine was extraordinary, no request was too much, and I enjoyed getting to try to converse in French. I don’t write a lot of reviews, and I usually travel Star Alliance, but for Air France, I’ll gladly make exceptions going forward! I will see Air France in business again in April, to Paris and Lisbon, I cant wait!	1
The Air Transat staff in Toronto was absolutely tremendous helping with a mix-up of golf bags upon our return from Punta Cana. I mistakenly took the wrong bag and the Staff did everything possible to ensure the bag i had taken got returned to it's rightful owner and that I received my bag promptly and with the utmost care. Thank you to the Air Transat Toronto Staff. You are terrific.	1
Another great flight with Air Transat! I prefer this airline than any of the other charter airlines out of Toronto Pearson. Flew club class. Service excellent start to finish, friendly staff. Nice meal and snacks. Amenity kits, comfortable big seats, big screens. Content is a bit dated but something to entertain. Flight left on time, arrived early. Onboarding quick. Exiting the plane was quick and efficient. Bags arrived and were off the plane fast. Air Transat has never let me down.	1
Air France has been improving recently even if I already enjoyed flying this Airline,. CDG could be a small downside for a few people but I've always loved it, even though everything might take a few more minutes, I have always like it because it's beautiful!	1
Service was typically Kiwi which was extremely friendly and never fails to deliver, every staff interaction was great and the food was outstanding. The only problem that the FREE wifi wasn't working but has worked well in the past so I think this was an outlier but did not detract from the flight.	1
I broke my foot on my vacation and the entire flight staff were amazing. The cabin staff were very accommodating and helpful. They gave me the extra room I needed to elevate my foot, helped me walk to the bathroom every time I needed to use it and frequently checked on me to make sure I was okay - the pilot even checked on me to see how I was doing. I appreciate the kindness of the staff and would fly with Air Europa again.	1
Flew with Air Serbia from Belgrade to Milan and back a couple of days after. Online check in with hand luggage only. Both flights were on time, cabin clean and neat, cabin service immaculate, friendly and well groomed cabin crew. Food served was sandwich and selection of drinks. Overall, great and professional service, well maintained and cleaned aircraft cabin, friendly and very informative announcments by both captains on both journey legs.	1
I must say that I am impressed by the Air France flight crew. I recently flew from NY to Bangalore with a connection in Paris with my wife and 12 month old son.  It was exactly what you would expect it to be. A nightmare! We had everything planned (my wife did I just follow orders) from the flight time, connection, food, sleep etc so that our child could have as smooth as a trip as possible. From NY to Paris we we golden. Smooth as silk. We took off he ate and slept. We landed and had some trouble figuring things out but we managed. Once we got on the plane for our Paris to Bangalore slight the nightmare began. He started screaming at the top of his lungs before the flight took off. Our plan for entertainment was lost during transport (ipad with pre downloaded 5hrs Cocomelon). He was rejecting all toys and foods. The lady behind us asked my wife " Is he going to be like that the whole flight?" After some back and forth with the other passenger, ourselves and the flight crew we took off. It was a 10hr flight and he cried for 9 of them. It was an out of body experience. Our son has never been so miserable. I dont know if it was sleep deprivation or his ears were bothering him but he was inconsolable. Our friend behind us, to her credit, along with the other passengers did not add fuel to the fire. The only bright spot was the flight crew. Which is the reason for the review. I have to give credit where credit is due. They were simply amazing. Very empathetic and supportive. Asking us if we needed any support on multiple occasions and it wasn't just one of them it was all of them. Providing us with food and supplies that I didn't even know was available. BTW did you know that there are children's eye covers? I found that interesting and don't know why. Anyway if it wasn't for our air heroes my wife and I would be needing immediate psychiatric therapy. We all know how difficult that is to get now and days. My salute to the air crew that day. You saved us and we are truly grateful. We will remember this day for a long time not only because of the difficulties we had with our son but for the care and help we received from the crew	1
I would like to say that the airline and cabin crew were absolutely brilliant. They were very attentive and in hand if we needed them. The inflight food was delicious and tasty, not bland like other airlines. We pre-paid for our seats and we’re very pleased with the extra leg room outbound and the Solo seats coming home. I would like to thank all the staff from check in until when we landed. So professional and quick so the queues were small and manageable. Air France made our holiday more amazing by delivering such a wonderful experience. Thank You.	1
Outstanding service. I have travelled from OTP to JFK via CDG and return in business class. A great experience from the lounge, food, beverages to the comfort of the seat. On the return segment JFK -CDG I was upgraded in La Premiere due to my Platinum Ultimate status. The onboard service was state of the art. The champagne the best I have ever tasted. The FAs and the pursers attitude and service flow less. Looking forward to my next trip with AF.	1
I flew from Madrid to Porto on a lovely Embraer 145. The aircraft was small and cosy a little bit old but perfectly functional. It only has three seats per row two in the right side and one in the left. I was lucky and got one on the individual lane. The flight was pleasant on time and extremely quick (45 minutes) despite the weather was not too good. The comeback was on a Embraer 190 also on time and quick. It was a night flight and they kept the lights off so the journey was pleasant and relaxing. No services offered onboard it is nonsense on such a short trip.	1
After a long work day, my flight home was cancelled due to bad weather. I'd had a series of unpleasant personal events earlier that week so this was the cherry on top for me. I was only in Wellington for the day so had nothing with me and no place to stay, so felt rather overwhelmed and was upset. The Air NZ staff member (male) who was working at 6pm on Wed 17 August turned my day around, reassured me and provided my with a taxi voucher, dinner and food vouchers, and a hotel stay. This man was compassionate and kind and provided amazing service. I'd like to make sure he gets the recognition he deserves, but also that Air NZ is thanked for their incredible service. My experience with the airline staff was pivotal to my week and I am extremely grateful.	1
I usually fly with Wizz Air, however, whenever I have the opportunity I fly with Air Serbia (they fly during the mornings) Copenhagen to Belgrade. The staff are very professional and they seem to really enjoy their job. The airplanes are clean on the inside and outside. Pilots always appreciated and informative. Nice music during boarding and when waiting to taxi. The Air Serbia brand is by the way very good looking. Normal leg space. Food and drink for a 1h 50m flight nothing I expected, but nevertheless got served. Very nice. No inflight entertainment on short haul, but who cares and who expects that? Will definitely try out Air Serbia bound for New York when I get the chance.	1
I had a wonderful experience with Air France. The staff was really friendly and helpful, I had a problem with my entertainment device and they quickly fixed it for me. The food was good and the service was perfect, it was possible to ask for drinks or snacks for free which is a big plus. The ambient lights made the flight more enjoyable and the plane was beautiful. I had no problem to retrieve my luggage or to board my flight. I'll definitely fly with Air France again, thank you !	1
Just had the most wonderful service from the Wellington crew on Flight 562. we were in row 28 I left my handbag behind a staff member called Wesley allowed me off the plane so my nephew and girlfriend could bring it security and then the rest of the flight the staff were so friendly kind and considerate. I dropped a knitting needle and the hostess got down on her knees to look for it. Thank you for allowing me to get my handbag, we fly to Vancouver on Friday to our sons wedding will need that Visa Card. Excellent experience truly grateful to you all.	1
I had to make a quick trip to LAX and back recently, one way in Premium Economy and returning in Business Class. On the outward journey the Premium Economy cabin was full. The staff were amazing and were visible in the cabin through the night. I was impressed with the space in my bulkhead seat. The meals were of very good quality. The return journey started out with a bump at check in at LAX. A lot of people (including myself) did now know that a Travelers Declaration had to be filled out online before you could enter New Zealand. All credit to the manager working the Business Class Check in, she had the patience of a saint dealing with all these confused and mildly angry travelers who know nothing of the Travelers Declaration requirement. When I was in the Star Alliance Lounge later, the same manager from check in made sure I had got the Travelers Declaration sorted and wished me well for the rest of the journey, top marks for remembering me and checking that I was all sorted.. The rest of the journey home was seamless and just like the Air New Zealand of old, pre covid. The staff were attentive and helpful. Nothing was too much bother for the staff. If you wanted a second dessert, no problem, just ask and you will receive. I got up to go to the bathroom after dinner, came back and my bed had been nicely made. The meals were superb and a cut above the already very good meals on the Premium Economy flight over. My only criticism is that the seats definitely feel a lot tighter than the 777’s, especially for sleeping.. Some airlines may have a better hard product, but that Kiwi warmth and kindness just cant be surpassed.	1
Flew Air Serbia from Belgrade to Rome. Cabin crew very attentive, welcome drinks, nuts, a hot meal, towels provided twice, everything for a little over an hour trip. Good leather seats.	1
Great food and customer service. The staff were very friendly. The food options and drink options were plenty. I had very limited time to catch flight from Delhi to Ahmedabad however staff helped a lot.	1
My first flights with Air Serbia, I was impressed. Both flights were on time, the crew were very welcoming and food pretty good (a choice between London and Belgrade). It was standard seating for economy class, not particularly comfortable but fine for a short flight. The overall impression was of a well managed airline with good staff. I had an overnight stop in Belgrade which worked well, the airport is efficient and easy to use, no queues. Transport into the city was regular and very good value. One of my better flight experiences of recent years and I would recommend Air Serbia to others.	1
On May 17th my wife and I flew from Rome to Toronto on flight 309. My wife had been injured in a fall the previous day and was experiencing acute pain due to three breaks in her upper right arm. When the Air Transat onboard staff realized her situation, they showed deep concern and compassion for her comfort and well being. During the 8+ hour flight at least one of the onboard staff would check on her on a regular basis. Kind gestures such as exhibited by the Air Transat staff were deeply appreciated. Because of the service we received I would not hesitate to recommend Air Transat at any time. Going forward, my wife and I will certainly enquire as to the availability of Air Transat when planning our next vacation.	1
I had 2 major surgeries in Puerto Vallarta and was in a lot of pain. We just needed to get home. The stewardesses, went above and beyond to help us, one let me get a personal water bottle and both of them kept checking on my husband and I. I was last to deboard and they both helped us. I can't say enough on how grateful we were that they took the time to care with do much sincerity.	1
Just flew from Copenhagen to Paris to Montreal on June 17th. We were behind schedule when we landed at CDG with only a small chance of making our connecting flight that day. My wife made it to the correct gate and was able to board while I ended up at the wrong gate. I would like to offer a huge thank you to Captain Emmanuel Rollier who insisted the plane would not leave until I arrived at the plane. The rest of the crew were equally supportive and helped create a positive ending to what had been a very stressful day. Thanks again to Captain and crew.	1
I would like to mention the name of Mr Sunil Lohat who did a great job by helping us and making our journey very comfortable. I think without the help of this gentleman, it wouldn't have been possible for us to board the flight. Mr Sunil helped us till the last moment and ensured that we board the flight. He did everything which a customer needs during any technical hitches which is not known to the passenger. Hats off to such a committed and helping person.  He really made our day in the time of crisis and now I have landed Toronto without any hassles.	1
I was travelling with my partner through New Zealand during a visit to our hometowns. We currently live in Melbourne and knew that traveling during covid would be a difficult time, but didn’t think that the flight dramas with Qantas we had would be so extensive. We were fortunate enough to have a connecting flight with Air New Zealand within NZ and Nat from Nelson airport went absolutely above and beyond to help us with a flight issue Qantas had created. This issue was not her responsibility to resolve at all but she could see we were in destress and did everything she could to help us change our flights and make a bad situation completely turn around into a positive one. I wish we had just booked all our travel with Air New Zealand from the beginning and have learnt from that mistake! The customer service team were amazing and Nat was a true highlight.	1
The only passenger in Business class from Tel Aviv to Belgrade, and served by a wonderful purser and her colleague. Served champagne before take off and more with hot nuts after departure. A good lunch and excellent wines were offered. Staff couldn't have been friendlier and more service minded. A delightful flight with cheerful staff.	1
I am a frequent flyer of AI. I m proud to share that my experience has been improving in recent times. The ground staff is courteous, helpful and cooperative. The quality of food has improved and the variety introduced is amazing. In fact this particular route which I flew, i reached before time. Strongly recommend	1
Was pleasantly surprised with Air France as I was expecting the worst experience. The aircraft felt up to date, entertainment system worked fine and had plenty of choices. Crew were very friendly and personally greeted us and asked if we needed anything. The meal services were great, the main meal was the best one I had in economy for quite sometime as mostly they are inedible but this was good, chicken with mushrooms and polenta, a small salad with Camargue rice and a delicious small pastry for dessert, coffee and wine. The meal service before landing was presented in a small gift bag and contents were tasty, a nice touch I thought.	1
Hobart to Auckland NZ198, inaugural flight 22 April 2021. Brand new aircraft with superb Cabin Crew, just like the flights on former TE from many years ago. Crew probably very happy to be working again, but this is how passengers expect a flight to be, even with lower fares. Aircraft was slightly less than half full, thus plenty of space for the 3 hour plus flight. The staff were so friendly and being an inaugural flight, sparkling wine was flowing freely. Comfortable seats with great video screens which were simple to use. I particularly liked the screen based ordering for drinks and food: Very professional and easy. (The return flight was a little different!). Flight only a few minutes late on arrival, no problem there. Return flight NZ197, 29 April 2021. Older A320, but also with same video screen. Crew were a little less friendly, but very pleasant nonetheless. I ordered and paid for a drink by card (brilliant!). Later an announcement was made that the service was soon closing. I ordered another drink and paid, but this time, it was not delivered to me. I'm not sure if another passenger received a free drink, or whether the aircraft system failed between the time of my order and the service closing. I have pursued this with the airline, and I am waiting on a response from them. Sadly, the return flight was almost empty. There were approximately 30 to 35 passengers on the flight, in an aircraft which seats about 180 passengers. The amount of space was enjoyable, but this does not bode well for a permanent flight on this sector. An Airline needs to make a profit, and I am hoping that passenger numbers will increase. People in New Zealand suggested that it was a little early for this flight to start due to the Corona Virus. Perhaps. I love to fly and I felt perfectly safe. Maybe I was lucky and avoided any health problems, but the precautions were strict and effective in my opinion. I will use this flight again. It is faster and cheaper than travelling via Sydney or Melbourne. I wish Air New Zealand the very best for this new service. It deserves to succeed.	1
My wife and I really enjoyed our stay at the Barcelo Maya Palace Resort. The flight from Toronto to Cancun on February 3, 2023 was flawless. On our return date on February 17, 2022, we were supposed to be picked up at the resort by included shuttle as notified by the App the day before at 8.30am. The shuttle arrived late and picked up a family but we were left stranded by the driver who informed us that we were not on the list and he had no room for us as the shuttle was full. A cab was dispatched that brought us to the Airport for $75 American dollars. I was given a receipt by the driver. At the Air Transat check in kiosk, I spoke with an Air Transat representative at the kiosk. She acted promptly and she personally took the time to speak with the Air Transat people at a nearby office and immediately was able to reimburse me for the cost of the taxi. Great customer service. I have flown with Air Transat in the past and I will continue to do so in the future. All around, great customer service. Thank you.	1
Ft Lauderdale to Toronto. What a pleasant experience from the Fort Lauderdale counter to the plane. At the Fort Lauderdale the staff was so humble and funny while he was checking all our paperwork. He took our stress away. On the plane, the staff were super amazing to handle my kids inquiries. They answered them very professionally. We received sanitizers pack and complementary drinks. I needed that so much so as my kids. Very polite. Plane entertainment system! I wasn’t aware Air Transat has entertainment for free! You can bring your own headphones and Voila you have hours of entertainments! Last ten years I have been traveling to Florida twice a year to my parents it’s just a three hour flight so never experienced this type of awesome service. My kids didn’t have any headphones the flight attendant provided headphones for free! It was getting better and better! Thank you Air Transat for your awesome service. I will be traveling soon in March to Punta Cana! Hopefully I will be able to travel with you guys again.	1
Visited the newly opened Air Serbia Premium lounge at Belgrade airport, had a freshly squeezed orange juice and very good macchiato. The seats in business class were extremely comfortable with a footrest. Pillow and blanket on the seat. Champagne boarding drink, nuts and hot towels. Tasty breakfast was served with real cutlery, champagne on demand. I was given a tablet which had a large selection of movies, music and games. Impeccable service from cabin crew, flight on time. 	1
Boarding at Heathrow was simple with the gate just opposite the lounge. Moreover, despite an almost full plane, we pushed back 15 minutes early. Business class seats are comfortable with wide seats, a foot rest and three levels of recline - a far cry from simply an economy seat with an empty seat beside, seen on so many short haul business class sections. I was offered a glass of champagne and a menu after boarding, and after take off my lunch order was taken. I was also offered use of an iPad for entertainment. Lunch was of good quality with three good courses. Overall the service from the cabin crew was both smart and friendly.	1
I received a call from Blair in the Blenheim office at 7:30pm informing me that my flight at 7:00 am the next morning was canceled., there were no alternatives to travel out of Blenheim and make my appointment in Wellington the next morning. Blair assisted with getting me a flight out of Nelson and still make my important meeting. He arranged transport to Blenheim and very professionally taken away all the stress that comes with a cancellation. This is by far the most amazing service I have ever had with any airline ever!	1
If you download there site it makes it so easy to know what to do, it removed a lot of stress for me has you know Covid restriction keeps on changing but they are always on the ball service. On the plane excellent, we want to thank our 2 stewards flight 837, Nicholas and Eric, two nice guy that gave us excellent customer service. We are flying again in March with them not premium class this time but I’m sure the experience will be the same. Thank you for making our trip memorable from the beginning through the end.	1
Travelled on Air Serbia from Thessaloniki to Copenhagen via Belgrade and they were my best flights. Cabin crew was very helpful and friendly and the food was very delicious. Absolutely perfect.	1
Travelled from Air Serbia from Larnaca to London via Belgrade. Check in was a breeze, the lounge at LCA operated by Swissport which was well stocked with snacks and drinks and plenty of seating. Also, an outside terrace which was nice. Seats on A319 were comfortable and the service professional and courteous. Served a choice of drinks and food was excellent. Lounge facilities in Belgrade were excellent, with a buffet spread that was delicious. Would fly this airline again. Delicious Serbian Baklava was served on the flight.	1
I was a passenger on flights JU 523 and JU 414 on 12/08/15. I was satisfied with this airline because it offers high quality services at good prices. The crew were helpful, friendly and communicative. The food was excellent and I recommend choosing the traditional serbian snacks and drinks. Furthermore, food and drinks (beverages, coffee, tea and alcohol) are included in the price. Even though there was a small delay in the transit flight, there was no delay on the arrival time. 	1
Charter flight (Belgrade to Zakynthos). Check-in was smooth and fast, same experience at the gate during boarding process. Aircraft was an older 737 but nicely refurbished inside (comfortable seats and lots of legroom). Flight departed on time where shortly after take off breakfast was served (which was a surprise to us coming from North America, as even on our scheduled flight in Canada we do not get anything). Tasty Serbian food with drinks and coffee. Pilot made a few announcements during the flight informing us about the weather and current position of the aircraft. Overall I was impressed with the service.	1
Boarding was on time, cabin crew were very friendly, flight was late for like 10 mins and the whole crew and pilots were very apologetic. Plane was spotless. Drinks, tea, coffee and cake was served on 1 hours long flight. For 36 Euro promo fare, very impressive flight.	1
PMI-BCN. Fast check-in. 35 min flight without service - as expected. Very comfortable plane arrived on time. Definitely recommended.	1
We arrived late to Belgrade and had 20 minutes until our next flight. Everything was organised and Air Serbia managed to get our bags on time all the way to Beirut. Exceeded my expectations. Great flight, friendly staff.	1
Took an evening flight with Air Serbia from Vienna to Bucharest via Belgrade. The flight was in a relatively small turbo-prop aircraft. I had a seat on the front with no one next to me, I also had about half a metre of leg space which was brilliant. Cabin crew very friendly and talkative, as it was a short hop I ended up talking with one of the stewardesses and a man on the opposite row about travel/politics for the entire flights. I would fly again.	1
Auckland to Sydney in February 2020. It was great flight with no problems. I was unable to pull up my booking on my phone so I had to go to customer service who printed it out. I will fly Air New Zealand whenever I can.	1
I thought this airline was very good. 23kg for luggage so I took some golf clubs. Flight was cheap. The service onboard was limited but it didn't need to be overcomplicated on a 2 hour flight from London to Madrid. Flights were on time and got to the destination a bit early both ways. Luggage was on the conveyor at the other end as soon as I arrived.	1
FCO-BEG-AUH Economy. Clean aircraft friendly staff good food excellent service. Our first flight FCO-BEG was late because of fog at BEG but we were immediately assisted at the gate and escorted until boarded the connecting flight. Unfortunately one of our luggage was lost and arrived only two days later. Great assistance from their customer service. Recommended.	1
Lisbon to Toronto. Thank you to the crew operating flight TS 733 on Monday March 16th. Amazing service. Despite the corona virus fears, this crew worked intensely to maintain a positive attitude. We waited for almost 2 hours in the plane upon arrival due to the high number of passengers at Customs. The Captain kept all passengers informed and calm. Thank you !	1
We flew a very early-morning flight from Toronto to Holguin, Cuba on February 10, 2020. This flight necessitated getting to the airport at about 4 a.m. I had done an on-line check-in and was heading to the airport's luggage check-in (as we have done before) but a staff member directed us to Air Transat's Options Plus check-in counter which had nobody there. The on-line check-in was easy, as it had been on previous Air Transat experiences. Check-in was easy, even though we had four checked-luggage suitcases. We were using Options Plus for the little perks which included first-of-line check-in and extra weight allowance. Our flight, TS0656 left on time and arrived in Holguin on time. Along the way, the flight staff proved friendly and we received the Options Plus goodies for which we had paid upfront. We found our seats, 19H and 19J comfortable and we enjoyed the movie selections. The screen system worked perfectly and watching movies and listening to music helped to pass the time as we flew above the clouds. Our return flight, TS0657 left Frank Pais Airport slightly ahead of schedule, after our having passed through customs to get to the waiting room. Once again, we enjoyed the Options Plus benefits - not counting the extra-weight allowance, because we had only two suitcases on our return trip. Once again, the flight staff were excellent. Our return-flight seats were 18H and 18J and comfortable and the in-flight movie system worked fine. On both trips, the toilets were clean. On both trips, Options Plus allowed us to choose from the menu and enjoy a sandwich and a drink. The sandwiches were fine. I had the "Montreal sliced meat" sandwich and my partner had the turkey sandwich. Both were fine and served the keep-us-going until another meal purpose. At the end of both flights I commended the Air Transat staff for their fine service. But this is something we have grown to expect from Air Transat which we have been using two and three times a year to fly to such places as Europe (mostly Gatwick in London), Cuba (mostly Holguin) and Mexico. I sympathize that some people don't get the same excellent experience that we have had with Air Transat. I was particularly concerned by a review by Alice G., who noted that prepaid and preselected seating was not given to her on a flight. This happened to one of our family members with Air Canada and caused tremendous distress. Air Canada is in the process of buying Air Transat and my hope is that the excellent service we find with Air Transat does not diminish to a lesser standard because of new ownership. In the meantime, thanks to Air Transat!	1
LGW-MAD. Flight supposedly on Embraer aircraft but instead on 737. Very good legroom for what is in effect a low cost shuttle flight. Comfy seats. Flight left and arrived on time. Only food available was to buy.	1
London Gatwick to Madrid in Oct 2012. Ordered extra legroom seats for 20 euros each way checked in online too. Check-in was quick boarding was on time and took off at the correct time - no delays. Staff onboard were able to speak both Spanish and English and sold a range of snacks drinks and other items - very reasonably priced and able to take credit cards. Flew on a Boeing 737-800 and an Embraer 195 jet aircraft. Flight itself was faultless - very comfortable seating heating in cabin was very good - excellent airline will look forward to flying them again!	1
Flew Bucharest - Stockholm via Belgrade with Air Serbia on a snowy Monday in February. Both flights operated with Airbus 319. Fresh cabins perfect service. A little late on departure from Romania but landed on time. Short transit in Belgrade. Smooth with no problems. Excellent service onboard. Snacks and beverages on the short flight full hot meal with wine served on the flight to Stockholm (free!). Just like flying used to be in the 80s!	1
JU414 and JU 415. Belgrade-Stockholm-Belgrade 22 and 26 January. Could not be faulted in any way. Excellent drinks snacks and food. Good wines (was offered to try both Serbian ones excellent). Flights on time. Five star experience!	1
Check in was smooth with no waiting time. Boarding was smooth. On board, interior has been refurbished, soft seats, good recline and clean cabin. Good quality catering service with choice of vegetarian and non vegetarian. Crew was attentive and was available to help. Magazines and newspaper were free. Food was almost till it is in stock. I am delighted to have great service from air India on domestic route.	1
Wonderful flights, flying like in the good old days. Good food, open bar, friendly FAs, good IFE with lots of good films/music, even on short European flights you get a snack and an open bar. They even let me check my bag for free both ways. Fantastic.	1
For some years now Air New Zealand has been my airline of choice on my annual trip from London to Los Angeles. Towards the end of 2019 I booked a flight for September 2020 in the knowledge that they were stopping this route as of October 2020. Last week I discovered that as a result of Covid 19 they would be cancelling this route with immediate effect and not resuming it. I put in a refund request via the WhatsApp link on their web and I had a full refund within 2 days. This service equalled the great service I have always experienced on board. I will miss travelling with them.	1
My wife and I flew Melbourne to Auckland on March 20, flight NZ124 leaving Melbourne at approximately 2pm. The performance of the flight attendants was outstanding - polite and professional. What was more amazing was the assistance that we received from who I believe was the senior attendant on our flight as we could not find our transfer bus as we were leaving the terminal. She appeared on the scene asking if she could help. She soon had this quickly sorted and we were on our way. This was going the extra mile especially considering that she was probably off duty and going home. I cant remember her name but if possible I would like someone to personally thank her on our behalf.	1
Winnipeg to Puerto Vallarta. I have flown with Air Transat over 6 times now since I have been retired a couple years ago. Air Transat has raised the bar so high choosing any other airline would be a very difficult task. Air Transat customer service right from Checking in to the flight crew has been absolutely fantastic on every flight I have been on.  Just wanted to say Thank-You and now that I am retired I am grateful I can now choose the Airline of my choice.	1
