My husband and I recently travelled on Aerolineas Argentinas from Buenos Aires. There was no facility for web check-in or to have our seats pre-allocated prior to check-in. We arrived more than 2 hours prior to the flight to be told that the only way we could sit together was to take 2 middle seats in the centre row of the plane. The A340 has a 2-4-2 configuration. In such a configuration 50% of the seats are aisle seats. However it appeared that almost all had been pre-allocated prior to the ordinary check-in opening. In the end we were offered an aisle and a middle seat in the very back row. It is time that Aerolineas recognized that families are entitled to expect to sit together on long haul flights without having to take the worst seats on the plane. Other airlines manage to do this why cant Aerolineas?	0
They delayed my flight by 3 days and were incredibly rude and unapologetic. I was supposed to fly from Sydney to Buenos Aires via Auckland and Santiago. I turned up at the check in counter in Sydney and was told the flight would be delayed because the plane hadn't arrived yet from Auckland but it would only be a couple of hours. When I returned they said the plane would not be arriving after all and that we would not leave Sydney for another two days. Staff were rude and unhelpful and once we were taken to the accommodation we didn't hear from them again except for a piece of paper under the hotel door telling us to be ready at 5am. After two days we went back to airport there was no staff member there and we had to go from counter to counter trying to find out which flight we were on. After finally checking in and going through immigration we were at the boarding gate when we were told that we would not be flying out after all as there was no plane to meet us in Auckland. No staff representative. I ended up changing to LAN Chile who were excellent.	0
Was booked on the flight on the 13th of July from EZE-SYD (which does not go via AKL anymore). I checked- in and everything was confirmed with my seat etc. I was at the airport at 6am for the 8.30am flight. After 1 hour in line I was only half way down the queue. A little bit later other passengers bound for SYD were denied access. The following reason was given: the weather pattern on the route to SYD. Therefore they had to get rid of weight to have a lighter aircraft to make it the entire way. Later we learnt that they had given freight/cargo priority and consequently 80 of us were stranded with the next flight due 3 days later which only had 40 free spots. The employees only spoke Spanish which was hard for people who didn't know the language. Lots of ideas were thrown around but evidently the flight left without us. I had checked the flight the days/weeks before I was due to fly it and noticed that the flight always left EZE delayed by 1-2 hours which could be for similar reasons. Maybe they should go back to flying via AKL to be able to accept all the paid passengers. Their compensation was not good either and I (and several others) decided we wanted a full refund.	0
Horrible food hot plane (and I feel the cold) seat didn't recline. No personal IFE had to watch a tiny screen at front of plane one movie wasn't in English. Didn't see staff much so couldn't get drinks. All flights delayed at both Auckland BA for 6 hrs each. Given measly meal voucher at BA that bought me nothing much. BA Airport was horrible and staff unhelpful. I had no personal effects for 24hrs once I arrived in Rio. I flew them to save $1000 over LAN Chile whom I will fly with next time and just spend the extra.	0
First 6 hours into the flight from Argentina to Sydney - no food or drinks offered to passengers. Audio didn't work food was horrible lots of trays given back full. Staff had little or no courtesy bad movies with the TV screen flickering at all times.	0
Miami to EZE. No online check-in or boarding pass. I had one carry on bag and they tried to make me check it. The plane seemed old the food was ok 2 movies on overhead monitors however my headset didn't work. Attendants were friendly hardly ever saw them except for the 2 "meals" no diet coke and no soft drinks available for breakfast. Landed 25 minutes late after a 9 hour flight with the announcement "another on-time arrival". Saying it doesn't make it so. I have to return on them but I'll not use them again.	0
Booked to fly Sydney to BA 1pm Tuesday it's now Friday and I've made it as far as Auckland. We sat all day at the gate in SYD eventually told flight cancelled due to mechanical problem. After spending 2 nights we left SYD last night only to land in Auckland for 16 hour layover due to crew shortages. No communication other than rumours from hotel staff. Airline had paid for accommodation and meals but very basic. No entertainment onboard other. Due to fly out 10pm tonight. Traveller beware.	0
AEP-USH. The departure time and flight number were different on the e-ticket boarding card and departure screen. Nobody could provide an explanation but in the end that didn't matter as it was 4-5 hours late depending on which time you chose. The aircraft was an elderly MD88 with no APU working hence the interior was stifling when we boarded. Leg room was appalling. The "snack" was inedible and the coffee undrinkable. To cap it all one bag was lost for 4 days.	0
I have flown with Aerolineas about 6 times over the last 4/5 years. Every single flight was either cancelled or delayed. The staff are generally not that bad and they take a lot of stick from people. Food no real issues. The flights themselves are just so unreliable.	0
IGR to AEP. Flight was showing delayed on the airport website still on time on the AR website. Unable to process web check-in. Complete chaos at the airport since the previous flight had been cancelled and the flight after ours was also cancelled. Not a single AR check-in staff or management available. After one hour of waiting with no announcement in English or Spanish or any AR check-in staff in sight we decided to take an 18 hours bus ride to ensure we get to BEU on time for our flight back to Canada the next day.	0
Buenos Aires to Ushuaia return. I flew from Ushuaia back to Buenos Aires and it was absolute chaos. The previous 2 days flights had been cancelled due to Chile Volcano the airport was full of people and there was no organisation or communication for waiting passengers. There were lots of angry passengers a TV crew and lots of police but a lack of Aerolineas staff.	0
Flight was cancelled from Sydney to Auckland on July 28. I knew this as had checked on internet. However when I tried to ring I got cut off 4 times before finally talking to someone. When we finally got to the airport the boy I was travelling with was 'on the list' but I wasn't and was touch an go as to whether I would get a flight at all. All ended well as we finally both got back to NZ even though we were put on different flights. I felt sorry for the staff in Sydney understaffed and under a lot of stress but they were polite and as helpful as possible.	0
New Zealand to Buenos Aires. They cancelled our flights and had wait hours in Argentina. The crew were not polite they did not provide accommodation and did not listen to our complaints. I needed to call to New Zealand to get someone from Aerolineas to answer my queries.	0
We spent 4 weeks in Argentina and took 5 flights with is airline. In this time they lost my baggage for two days cancelled one flight with no previous notice delayed two times and worst of all the last airplane we took tried to depart and stop last minute twice due to technical difficulties. We had to wait for 24 hrs for them to fix it and lost our connections to Mexico. The company refused to assist us to solve any problem and kept saying : there's nothing we can do present your claim on line. I will never flight with Aerolíneas Argentinas again!	0
Flight suspended in Aukland for 24hrs due to an industrial dispute (they told us it was due to an engineering issue but we found out later this was a lie). Although we were put up in a hotel room it still lost us one day out of 10 of our hard saved visit to relatives. Waited in Auckland airport for 8 hrs before they ferried us out to hotel - dinner at 3am and had to be awake by 8 to go again (we had kids with us). Flight home was delayed again at Argentina (captain turned up 2 hours late).	0
I had booked a flight from Greece to Cuba. Due to COVID it was cancelled. I accepted a voucher to travel later. Then came the war and there are no flights over Europe. I asked for my refund and the reply was that I have to travel to Russia to receive my refund from Russian territory by myself. No other options. I didn't have to visit Russia to book my ticket.	0
We reached airport with my children and they mandated to do RT PCR test to return from Mauritius to india for my children who is only 5 years old and not yet attained 6. In the website they have not mentioned that a RTPCR is required for children for age 5. When i said it is their duty to inform the passengers about the mandatory documents to carry for boarding ,they said it should be known by you. First he asked me to take RTPCR test for entire family even after i have shown him the fully vaccinated certificate. Food served in the flight from reunion to Chennai is the worst food. They changed the travel date all of a sudden. Earlier it was booked for 27 July from Chennai and then they rescheduled to 30th.	0
Flew 4 legs from Santiago to Iguazu. First one cancelled and we took next flight 3 hours later. Second one was delayed. The same with third flight. The last one also delayed before we could board and once onboard we had to stay sitting in the plane at Buenos Aires airport for more than an hour in a very warm day.	0
Has your flight been cancelled by Aeroflot themselves? Forget about your money back. You will never see them. I'm waiting for a refund for last 2.5 years!	0
Mauritius to Madagascar via Reunion Island. The flight has been delayed from 4 to 7 and now 9.15 pm, no communication or support from the ground staff. They knew about the delay before the departure from Mauritius but did not inform the customers. Acces to lounge was given only after insistence from us and only to who has asked for it, not to all afected travelers, and no airline representative has spoken to us, as we should be grateful for the lounge access. No alternative connection was offered. Kids and old people were left without even water and waiting confused. Very unprofessional staff and airline!	0
Abu Dhabi to Hong Kong return using Air Seychelles. The journey was made easy by the service provided by the air crew. The food was nice there was a decent selection of drinks and the seats were comfortable. I would travel with this airline again and I would definitely recommend. I am a Gold card holder with Etihad and was initially dubious about flying with a connected airline.	1
Papeete to Los Angeles. We really enjoyed flying with Air Tahiti Nui. The staff is very nice and helpful. The seats are colorfull, the screens are good quality with recent movies. Everything is free onboard. We really recommend this airline.	1
As regular visitors to Malta we have always flown with a different airline but this time we decided to fly with Air Malta mainly because this year Air Malta was a lot more competitive on price than our usual airline. We flew out of Manchester to Luqa on 6th October and returned 13th October. After the excellent service we received we have decided to be regular travellers and look forward to booking in the near future.	1
LGW-MLA. At the risk of sounding like a record stuck in a groove this was the fourth Air Malta flight in two weeks which went very smoothly and efficiently. Check-in at Gatwick was instant and the revamped fast track facilities were as they should be. Plane left on time and arrived 15 minutes early. Service was friendly. Only gripe is that if you are sitting in row one there is nowhere to put ones bags as the overhead lockers directly above them are used by the crew necessitating stowing the bags slightly further down the plane which is a particular nuisance when disembarking.	1
We travelled AUH/SEZ/AUH April 2013. The flights were both excellent. On time comfortable and with enthusiastic cabin crew. Even addressed by name in economy class!	1
Flew JNB-SEZ and return. On both ways we had the same aircraft an older but very well maintained A330. The seats in economy are very comfortable and the service and catering were outstanding. Even the toilets were cleaned several times during the flight. Only the inflight entertainment could be better but I had my own iPad.	1
Flights in economy from Johannesburg to Abu Dhabi via Mahe on 27 March. On time excellent service comfortable seating and adequate entertainment. Was a joy to travel with them and transfer at the Seychelles airport easy. Airport is old and small - just a short walk to plane - not much to do there but fine for transfer. Highly recommended. Disgraceful service.	1
Manchester-Malta return. Very good flights cabin interior comfortable and clean. Drinks cost a lot less than the low cost airline. Cabin crew were attentive not obtrusive. I have travelled with Air Malta for twenty two years and find them to be the confident option.	1
FRA-MAL on Airbus A319. Flight on time crew were very friendly and smiling. The food was very tasty and consisted of chicken with mashed potatoes and a delicious cake. All in all I was very impressed with Air Malta.	1
We had to travel to France from Gatwick to catch our flight. Staff are warm friendly and helpful. I have never come away from a flight thinking how awful it was.	1
I flew Air Seychelles (code share with Air France) Business class from Paris to Mahe. I regularly fly Business and I have to say on this particular flight the service was as good if not better than many of them. The crew were very good the service was excellent and the food great. Beds were 95% flat (not enough incline to notice). Even the comfort pack had organic creams and oils flower essences etc. I cant comment on the entertainment as I worked and slept most of the flight but I remember being impressed with the overall service from beginning to end. I flew again a week later again in Economy which seemed about average in comparison to other airlines.	1
I flew to Mahe from London Heathrow via Milan. Everything was done on time and service was excellent. Crew were friendly and took great care of my sick mother thought the flight. I really enjoyed the flight and will recommend the airline to anyone who wants to travel to the beautiful Seychelles.	1
Just arrived back to Heathrow from Malta. Everything went like clockwork very attentive friendly cabin crew great in flight food free newspaper. Recommend flying with Air Malta every time beats the competition.	1
Rome to Malta. I've flown Air Malta many times in the past but haven't for quite a while and was surprised to discover it still provided meals and drinks for such a short flight unlike most carriers. The flight attendants were friendly and attentive. The flight departed and arrived on time. There was a hitch at the airport with the departure gate changing and passengers not told - I think this may have been the fault of the airport not the airline. I have flown other airlines in and out of Malta before and have had problems but have always found Air Malta to be the most reliable.	1
I went to Zurich and back from Belgrade on 25.12.2021. and back on 31.12.2021. The cabin was clean, the staff was nice, the toilets were clean and the seats were good for a 2-hour flight. The flights were on time. Economy standard tarrif was about 130 euros return which was super cheap.	1
Since my sister moved to live in Malta over 14 yrs ago my family and I have enjoyed twice yearly trips to Malta from Birmingham Airport. Having always flown with Air Malta all this time and enjoyed the experience apart from the odd delay on departure I was shocked to find out that Air Malta no longer fly from or to Birmingham Airport. Why is this? Now we have to make alternative arrangements to travel elsewhere (other destinations other than Malta) as we were spoilt by Air Malta and their professionalism care and attention to their passengers young and old.	1
I was flying from Moscow during these hard times, and the Russian Authorities made it complicated for the airline to depart. The plane was about 5hrs late and everybody missed their connection. Air Serbia gave us a hotel, restaurant access and a packed breakfast for those leaving early. They really went out of their way.	1
Third time I have travelled London to Malta with my family. Flight was excellent food fine and staff very helpful.	1
Melbourne-Sydney-Port Vila-Melbourne. Flew Qantas to connect with flight to Port Vila. Old style seats in Business with not much recline but not a real problem for a 3hr flight. Service was excellent with a choice of 2 main courses for lunch and drinks were promptly offered. Cabin crew were typically Vanuatuan - smiling and courteous and they really seemed to enjoy their job. Inflight entertainment was interesting the first time around but then repeated well into the flight! Perhaps they could upgrade this aspect. A word of warning when checking in at Port Vila for a flight out. Checked in 2 hours prior to flight for Melbourne but then kept waiting for security and immigration to open the door for nearly 45 mins in a very warm (non-airconditioned) airport. Lounge at Port Vila mall but at least air conditioned but only packets of chips to eat. Overall it was a most pleasant flight with a great crew on all legs.	1
This is not the first time I flew Air Serbia, but it was the first flying business class. One thing that none of the people complaining about broken wheels (I had those broken by Lufthansa and never saw a refund either!) are saying is that Air Serbia seems to be one of the very few airlines in the world respecting the safety distancing rules that airlines are supposed to obey but do not! All the middle seats on our flight, both in the Economy and Business class were blocked. After flying Air Serbia in December I had to fly Turkish, AeroMexico, Avianca and Viva Colombia and none of them had this policy - we flew as packed as ever. So, hat down to Air Serbia for going this extra mile and flying half empty planes in order to make passengers safer during the pandemic. Every other aspect of our trip was just fine: there was a wonderful lounge with free food in Belgrade, which we used before the flight, the big meal on the flight, we flew safely and comfortably, the crew was very kind and polite, our luggage made it, and the touchdown at Istanbul was like landing on cotton. I could not wish anything more from an airline. Thank you and keep up the good work.	1
