This is the worst company to fly with! When covid happened, Aeromexico cancelled my ticket and gave me a voucher. I was supposed to go to a wedding and the wedding had passed. I requested multiple times for a refund. I kept getting refused and it’s been hard for me because I cannot afford to travel due to the current situations and I am suffering financially!	0
Aegean is getting clients to book flights that they proceed to cancel a few hours later. Instead of refunding the money, they either propose to transfer you to more expensive flights or issue vouchers that take ridiculously long time to be issued.	0
Horrible customer service. Cancelled my ticket due to pandemic, moved to new dates without adding the seats and the baggage booked which was at an extra cost. For 3 days I have called without exaggeration over 50 times. No response on their phone numbers. I don't know how this could get any worse of an experience.	0
This flight was cancelled by Aegean and I am still waiting for my refund.  Where is my money?	0
Check in at Gatwick was slow (average 15 mins per passenger - there is a clock at least one had to wait 25 minutes and a family had to queue 3 times to get check in) that although I was issued boarding passes and went directly to security the machine refused me entry because the flight was closed. The check in staff were a sub-contractor and there was no Aer Lingus representative at the airport. Calls to Aer Lingus took at least 30 mins wait and several attempts. I was charged a $200 change fee and had to spend GBP28 to bus to Heathrow. Now my calls for recompense do not go through, nor does online chat get any response despite being online for several hours. This is not service at all. It is effectively a shut out.	0
Aer Lingus lost my baggage on March 26th. The lost baggage was located the same day (March 26th) in Paris. For 14 days Aer Lingus has been unable to simply put that bag in a plane and have it flown to Toronto. After about 20 phone calls and 3 emails Aer Lingus stills says to be apologetic about my situation but the tone of voice of every single baggage claim representative says different. Aer Lingus doesn't offer a phone number to escalate claims nor give the option to email anybody. At this point i am willing to even email the CEO of he company but Aer Lingus is careful not to provide that information. Aer Lingus is a company that simply don't care about its customers and will treat with utmost disregard to every single customer asking for their assistance.	0
One of the worst airlines I've experienced. First, the customer service does not exist, I've tried to call for four days, waiting for over three hours before giving up, so I had to drive to the airport to ask a few simple questions! Chat was not available. Then on our flight back from Dublin, instead of extra leg room sits in the first row, 8a and 8c, that I paid separately over $400, we were assigned a second row, 9a and 9c and when before boarding I asked why, they told me that it's ok and I'm still on the first row because the layout of the plane was reconfigured.  When we boarded the plane, they just said sorry and offer to move us to even worst seats, next to 3 month old baby. The final insult was when the guy came to us and offer some left over wine from the business class 30 minutes before landing. In my list of the worst airlines, Aer Lingus has the solid second place (after Spirit of course...)	0
Worst airline and horrible refund policy. I was to fly from Beijing Capital to Dubai, but they cancelled the flight. I applied for a refund and it’s been 4 months and I still have not received my refund.	0
I have tried to communicate with you very actively and it has not been possible. Very bad customer service! They misled me in a bad way, over selling my seat, they sat me further back and they did not refund my money. In addition, they charged me for my luggage as if I had only had the ticket where you sat me. Traveling alone with a 2-month-old baby I was forced to pay for everything they said and thinking that they would call me to pay for the error, wherever and whenever as your staff at SDQ instructed me. Not only have they not called me, but they don't even answer any of my attempts at communication. I would never recommend your services, I am going to be in charge of telling and making public with evidence this outrage to a client of your "premier club".	0
I purchased several airline tickets to fly with the family for vacation. I needed to make a change. And no it wasn't a last minute thing. I did with 2 months prior to departure. They have the worst customer service. First to get someone to answer your call as I tried several days and no one answers the phone good luck. Its like playing the lottery with them. And then after the 4th day ( my lucky day because they answered) after one hour of waiting. They can't make my change they said. And if I choose for them to make the change then I would incur additional fees of $900. Are you kidding me. They are obviously not making the money because of all the upset customers they have. That they are trying to make money with any fees they can implement. terrible. First and last time I fly with them.	0
I purchased a round trip, needed to come back sooner then anticipated they for some reason couldn’t switch the dates so I lost that money. Fine so then I booked a flight for three to come back home they took my money it went through it was taken out of my bank acct up until today which is May 22 and I still haven’t received it back. When I get to the airport with two minors Aeromexico tells me my reservations don’t exist, yet they grabbed my money and I got stuck in Guadalajara with two kids.  I will never fly with Aeromexico again. Nor will I recommend anyone to that airline. I’ve had problems with them since the flights were booked. I spent over $3500 dollars this April just with this airline. I was able to fly back after purchasing $1600 worth in tickets with another airline.	0
I called Customer Service to cancel My flight that was departing to Mexico City early next day. I explained that I won't be able to make the flight since that day at my office one of the employees was tested positive and I was in close contact with him. The agent had 0 customer service he was helpless and told me that I won’t get any refund or future credit and told me go write an email and explain them they will answer you in few days but I won’t help you. After I wrote the email explaining everything I received a Standard email response that I think it’s an Automatic response that they just to everyone without even bothering to read the circumstances stating that they won’t give any credits or refund and they hope to see me travel with them again.	0
Heraklion to Thessaloniki with Aegean Airlines. Awful experience, very rude crew and they charge extra for luggage while you only can have one luggage of 8 kilos without informing you about changes before the check in.	0
I was traveling to Bucharest, after checking in and going through the control area, I arrived at the gate that my flight was going to take place.  30 minutes before the flight, they announced that the boarding will start soon. Firstly, it was smooth no problems with anyone even though some people had more than 1 luggage, duty free bags. Towards the end of boarding and approximately 20 people were standing at the queue, a female came to check the last people's tickets to see what ticket they purchased. I have purchased the economy class ticket along with most of my fellows. That lady checked my ticket, and said only one bag is allowed in the plane looking at my other hand while I was holding an extra duty free bag with 2 bottle of spirit that I purchased. And she literally pointed that I had to shove into my bag 2 alcoholic spirits which it was really hard since my bag was smaller than the required size.  I did manage to storeboth in my bag which I was really glad about it. When I reached the ticket check, the same lady stopped me and said "OK did u manage to fit everything in your luggage'' I replied "yes thank you" and she goes "ok let's check the weight". It's this moment that you realize the obvious. Yes the luggage was more than 8kg but what you expect after she is the one that told me fit everything in your bag so you can board the aircraft. So I was really angry at that moment and that is why I started yelling. What was the outcome?! I did manage to fit the 2 alcoholic spirits in my bag I had only one bag That bag was more that 8 kg obviously since I had to fit everything She initially said nothing can be done and after a while she changed her mind and charged that bag with an extra 50 euros.	0
London Heathrow to Dublin. Aer Lingus is the flag carrier of Ireland. God help Ireland! I sent an email over a week ago with my Etihad booking reference, asking 2 simple questions and still no response from Aer Lingus. Q1. What is my carry on baggage allowance (I'm flying via a partner airline) and Dublin to London is my final leg with Aer Lingus? Q2. What do I have to do when transferring from a partner airline arriving at Terminal 1, then departing from Terminal 2? Do I need to collect my checked-in baggage at Terminal 1 and then recheck in for the Dublin to London flight? Simple questions. No response. What terrible customer service.	0
Flew from United States to Dublin fine. Their customer service is the worst, usually 60+ minute wait each time you call, sometimes they pick up and disconnect right away, start process all over again. If you're lucky they pick up in 40 minutes. My wife and I booked business class seats for our flight back. While in Ireland we contracted Covid three days before our departure. Immediately called the airline to explain the situation how we couldn't leave on our original date, we simply wanted to change our departure date to a later date. After again a 60 min. wait on hold for customer service we were told that not only did we have to pay $500 each ticket to move our departure date, our business class seats were not refundable, transferable, or eligible for voucher. Thousands of dollars straight to Aer Lingus without them showing any empathy, courtesy, or willing to help in anyway. Simply "its our policy" and if I wanted to speak to a supervisor one could get back to me "within 72 hours". During a global pandemic this airline is preying on people with no regard for their customers, just are completely fine stealing their money. So sick in another country, spending money on extended hotel stay, and losing thousands of dollars to Aer Lingus and they simply did nothing, nor cared.  Dealing with this airline or worse than having Covid itself.	0
On my flight today from Washington DC to Brussels, I was denied boarding the flight. Despite just a connection flight and less than a 2-hour layover in Dublin, they wanted me to have an Irish Transit Visa. I am a permanent resident of the United States and have a valid Schengen visa. Since I have an Afghan passport, so had to obtain a transit visa. While I was booking my tickets, I provided all my documents and details (passport, green card info, and visa) to the airline. They send me the link to Verifly to submit all the required documents for my trip, they never informed me about any transit visa requirement. The Aer Lingus representatives on the counter were rude and even didn't care to even provide any information. This caused me a considerable financial loss. I have continuously tried to connect to their customer service line, but couldn't succeed in being on hold for more than an hour. I will never book any tickets with this airline and would never recommend them to anyone.	0
I booked to go in to Seattle and out of San Diego business class in June 2022. They sent a simple email saying the Dublin Seattle leg was cancelled. Then begins a bizarre sequence of attempts to try and work out exactly what I was going to do. Is the San Diego Manchester leg still active? Do I get a reasonable refund? Try and call, no business priority line despite paying for business, just a line with no indication of how long you will be on hold at 9p a minute. They recommend you use messenger. They answer once a day. How can I have a sensible conversation like that to resolve my concerns. I also travelled to Chicago from Manchester. There was no business class Manchester to Dublin so you are treated as an economy passenger. All fine once you get to Dublin but is poor before that. Overall there is no way to get hold of a person and have a sensible conversation, if it works it’s fine but if it goes wrong customer service is appalling.	0
Guangzhou to Vancouver via Beijing booked for mid-April. The worst airline I have ever seen. Air China doesnt care their customers and just want to get money from their customers. Refund policy is ridiculous and try to cheat customers. When you call customer service, the only thing they said is there is nothing I can do. Will 100% not to choose this airline ever again	0
Paris to Shanghai via Moscow. Our flight was 2hours delayed in Paris, therefore, we couldn't have the transfer in Moscow. They offer us to stay one night in the Novotel, nearby the airport. A driver were supposed to come at 10pm to pick us up. He came at the end at 11:35pm (the hotel was 5 minutes away from the airport). The staff was so incompetent and unpleasant. There were rude to us, they did not tell a word about anything, they did not communicate at all. Every time we had a request, they answered "wait a moment". We wait til midnight, once at the Novotel Hotel, and it was a joke. They took us through the garbage local and then we had to queue because the scanned our passport before getting into our rooms. They knocked in our doors the all night and wake us up at 5am calling on the phone and knock our doors. No customer service at all, they were horrible.	0
This is by far the worst airline I have ever flown on. Horrible customer service. I do not know how this airline is in business. Just try and call them, even their phones contacts can't help you and have hang up on you no matter how nice you are trying to be. Try sending them an email using the email on their website - it doesn't work! Warning - do not miss your connecting flight! Had to re-purchase my connecting flight from Mexico City to Mazatan which cancelled all my tickets for my return flight home 2 days later. Please read all the other reviews before using this airline. Please do yourself a favor and choose another airline!	0
There was one flight out of Utila on CMAirlines and one flight out of Honduras on Aeromexico. I had an hour before my flight and they refused to board me. They wasted an hour when they could have just put me through security and gotten me to the gate on time. The woman at the Aeromexico desk said "I'm sorry this desk is closed" and walked away without even trying to book me onto the next flight. I ended up booking a flight on United and lost the $1000 I spent on my Aeromexico flight. Aeromexico is the worst airline I've ever had to deal with and I will never fly with them again. I've tried calling their customer service lines and I have never once reached a human. Don't ever fly on Aeromexico.	0
Just to start off, they're customer service is you calling a phone number that no one answers. Now to the actual flight, they made me miss my layover they basically told me to buy a ticket for twice as much or to not take my luggage. The supervisor wouldn't even listen, and told me to go straight to buy another ticket. Another couple had the same issue, but they booked through another airline, and were able to not only get not only a reschedule but also their hotel room for the night. I went to another airline, and they gave me better options and very quick help, and it only took them 5 minutes. My only regret is having to wait for more than two hours for Aeromexico's customer service and not getting a flight the same day with the other airline.	0
My honeymoon was cancelled due to Covid. The booking company refunded me the hotel but not the airfare, they told me to deal directly with Aeromexico in order to get a voucher (not a refund). I accept that I cannot get a refund, its their policy, but give me an extension to utilize my paid fare. I am very upset because I've been tirelessly trying to speak to an Aeromexico agent to book my new travel plans and it is virtually impossible to get through. Originally I was given one ticket number, apparently I need two ticket numbers for the two plane tickets originally purchased, the agent I spoke to yesterday did not want to bother to search for them under my name and so after a 46 minute hold had to hang up the phone and call back later. Today I got through someone on the live chat and was charging me an additional $533.94 on top of my $910.84 paid value, when I responded a minute and a half later, the chat was closed. They wanted to charge me $1,444.78 for regular cabin plane tickets for a trip 6 months from now. I do not know where else to go and take care of this injustice.	0
Aeromexico is an extremely dishonest airline. They will do absolutely anything to keep your money and refuse any rebookings or recourse. Today we were refused entry to a flight despite showing the new COVID measures to enter Colombia do not require a COVID test. Despite that we were refused entry and the employee refused to rebook us furthermore no one ever answers the customer service, even after a 2 hour wait. Calling back and accessing option 4 for the Premium ticket holder (which we were) simply disconnects the line. Attempting to rebook online requires a 13-digit ticket number. The tickets issued by Aeromexico are only 12 digits. If you put an extra digit on the end, you will be told that your ticket cannot be changed and to call the customer service. Aeromexico are beyond a terrible airline.	0
I cannot speak for the flight itself but for the boarding experience at Malpensa Airport. Boarding staff were verbally aggressive towards me. I hadn't the PLF form to fly to Greece but managed to submit it while waiting fellow passengers boarding, the flight was due to arrive at 9 pm and I would receive the PLF at 0 am the next day so I could easily waited that time at Athens airport to present it to authorities, still the boarding gate lady, which spoke fluent Portuguese and was Portuguese, refused me boarding.	0
The A320neo has 31 rows of seats which means the legroom is very tight. During e-check in they allocate you seat which you cannot change unless you pay at least €5. Inflight service was poor with a bag which contained a sandwich, a snack and a bottle of water. They do not serve alcohol due to covid-19. Announcements were on English and Greek.	0
I had two calls with them on the 23rd and the 24th of July with regards to changing my flight. According to them, I could have one change without penalty with no extra charge due to Covid-19. However, because I needed to change airports, I had to pay the penalty. Whilst on my first call, the girl I talked to told me that I needed to pay 100euros for the change whereas the next day I was told to pay 140euros for the same change (Note: The flight rate didn't change at all). Despite the difference, I changed my flight ticket asking for a baggage too. They booked my ticket without adding a baggage! I called yesterday to ask what happened and they were telling me that there was no charge for the baggage. Then, they told me they would listen to my recording and call me back. They called me two hours later the phone was ringing for 5 secs and I did not manage to pick it up. I called back and I was told that the girl who was assisting me finished her work for the day. The next person told me that would look into it but instead of putting me on hold, they hung up on me and never called back! I called again today, the assistant could not find the notes of the first person who listened to the recording and of course did not add my baggage for free. I did however requested both calls (the one asking for 100euros and the second one when they asked for more money and did not add my baggage) I am waiting for the response. On the 2nd of August, I flew from Athens to Heraklion. There was about a 2-hour delay and the airline offered us a free ticket. However, they state that I cannot use the free ticket during Christmas, Easter, July and August but as I live in the UK and I am not allowed to use it the only periods that I can travel to Greece. Due to Covid-19 they do not allow a backpack and a cabin bag on board. They do not allow to check-in the cabin bag. The price tickets are not cheaper either.	0
Flying from Rhodes to Larnaca with my family during the Covid-19 pandemic with Aegean Airlines was not a nice experience. The passengers behind us kept taking their masks off and talking, and despite our numerous attempt to ask the staff to ask the passengers to keep their masks on they took it off. Even a steward talked to them for 15 minutes while it was off and still they did not care. We ended up having to keep it on for everyones safety and they just said relax.	0
New York to Beijing. Air China cannot be trusted as a 1st World Airline. I purchased a refundable airline ticket and had issues with my connection to the Air China flight. My entire family was going to the Far East for my daughter's graduation. Our connecting aircraft was cancelled due to a maintenance issue and we missed our flights. When I tried to re-book the next day, I could not reach anyone in their US office. They were closed. Seriously! I had to call their China number to try and get service. I was told that I had to re-purchase the tickets. My ticket was refundable and so I simply cancelled it given I could not re-schedule my family's flights. I am still waiting on that refund. I have sent approximately 15 e-mails to Air China. I did receive one response that advised me that I had to go to their website and formally cancel my flight which I did on the phone with their service agents. I tried that several times but their site didn't work. My advice to anyone traveling to China, do not use Air China. They are not a professional airline and their service is the absolute worst that I have experienced in 30 years of travel. Fly any other airline but do not subject yourself to this company.	0
Montreal to Beijing. Worst airline company, this is the only Chinese airline which refused to provide full refund for tickets cancelled before Jan 28. The government set up policies about refunding but this firm is just playing word games.	0
Male to Moscow. Really disappointed with the whole return flight from Male - it is a long flight, plane OK, but the crew very rude - it was a big disappointment, the way they treated passengers, snappy answers, etc. Flight was delayed by almost two hours, but no proper apology, etc. I find it also very strange that the drinks are served half an hour before the meal, by the time your meal arrives, you have none left, then you wait about another half an hour to get a coffee? I think this should be seriously re-thought, it is the same way on all long haul Aeroflot flights. The biggest issue however was at arrival when two of our suitcases came totally damaged, we have reported this at the airport immediately, were advised to log the given report via Aeroflot website within 7 days, now we received answer - very rude, lots of exclamation marks, asking for whole set of documents, new statement from us? for what - the report was done at the airport, copy of the passport, etc. Any airline can have a nice plane, but they can make a difference when something goes wrong and in customer service, apparently still long way to go with Aeroflot.	0
So, we booked flights with them leaving April 16 2020 leaving Cleveland OH to Cozumel MX for 7 people. Dur to Covid 19 shut down we were in lock down and flights were cancelled. We called and was told our tickets would be extended for a year. I would have to book by April 30, 2021 and fly by Nov 30, 2021. I have been trying to get these tickets rebook for a couple of weeks. Yesterday I was transfer or put on hold five times and each time the calls were dropped and long wait times. What I did find out is they have no flight from Cleveland nor are they flying into Cozumel. They are only flying from Pittsburgh or Buffalo to Cancun MX. What this means is we now have to drive to Pittsburgh or Buffalo then when we arrive in Cancun, we have to hire a van to transport us 1 hour to Playa del Carmen then again pay for a 1-hour ferry ride to Cozumel. Then repeat the process to get back. To top it off while we paid $431.33 for the original ticket. Now that they are not offering the flight we paid for and we have to jump though hoops to get to our destination Areomexico in partnership with Delta Airlines are changing us an additional $953.40.  I had to book flights for two more people. That done I get the email with the ticket in Spanish that I cant read and they never sent the ticket for the 7 that we had to change. I was on the line this time for 3 hours and 38 minutes!	0
The flight in general was great, the problem was with the luggage handling, one of our suitcases was severely damaged when we arrived in Puerto Vallarta, we contacted customer support to get help and a solution to replace or fix our suitcase, I contacted them almost daily to try and resolve the issue as I had no suitcase for my flight back due to their mishandling of the luggage, and the only response I got was "someone will contact you in the coming days". This never happened, no one ever contacted me and no one even tried to fix my problem. In the end, I had to get my bag wrapped with plastic and call it a day! Their lack of support or customer service is very disappointing, I used to recommend Aeromexico as a good airline, now I would say, be careful and pray that you don't run into any issues, otherwise you will never get a solution to your problem, such a shame that they do not help themselves by helping their customers, this is something caused by them with no accountability whatsoever.	0
I had confirmed a return date but the airline changed it saying I wanted that date. I spent half my vacation trying to change it back but the airline kept hanging up on me and then blocked my calls. I had to buy a second ticket to go home including one for my son who is 1 yr old but they charged his ticket as an adult. No one at the offices or even the airport could help me with the mistake. They all said I had to call their call center which screened my calls. I finally got an answer by email saying they would call back and im still waiting on that call. Plus the staff is rude. They don't even say excuse me when they pass by. They only offered what looked like a flat day old sandwich and that was on the return flight. On the first flight they only offered peanuts and they couldn't even offer milk for my son.	0
Heraklion to Thessaloniki. They said that because of covid-19 we could only bring one item on board. People had to measure their luggage size and to pay 40 euros extra, while there was plenty of space on board. At the same time there were really no airport covid19 tests taking place.  Also my seat was small for 75 mins flight.	0
Absolutely a trash experience coming from Dublin to Chicago. We ended up waiting on the plane for other passengers to board when it was way past our expected take-off time by over an hour. We were not compensated for this lost hour in any way at all. People who can’t show up on time need to be left behind in order to keep the responsible people on schedule. Absolutely horrible experience and I’ll always be telling people about it and how awful it was. My time is valuable and I didn’t appreciate how inconsiderate Aer Lingus was regarding it.	0
Bangkok to London via Bejing. The website doesn't work properly so you are not allowed to checkin online. Rude staff that doesn't speak English. Plane really uncomfortable and unclean. Don't change flight in China because you will find yourself lost with staff unable to speak English and very rude. Also they laugh on your face when you try to ask questions in English. I will never recommend this airline.	0
London to Manila via Beijing. I went to Manila via Air China and had a connecting flight to Beijing. Upon arrival in Manila, my luggage is not there. I had to fill up a form indicating that my luggage is missing, etc. The following day I received a reference and after that no one even bother to call me or update me about my missing baggage after that. It’s been 6 days already and still I dont receive anything from them. Even their customer service is not helping saying that they dont have contacts to Beijing or Heathrow and all they can do is wait. If only I can go and find it myself in Heathrow, Beijing or Manila airport, I will find it myself.	0
Moscow to Paris. A week prior to my flight the company changed the rules for carry-on luggage dimensions allowed on board so that my SwissGear luggage small case (promoted as meeting any airline carry on luggage requirements) that I had with me was no longer meeting their requirements for 1 centimeter! And they asked me to pay 100 euros to have it checked in. I have never had any problems with any airline that checked this case in as a carry on even with low-cost like WestJet. Avoid this airline if you don't want to feel frustrated. Worst experience ever.	0
We would fly from Amsterdam to San Jose (Costa Rica) on July 15, 2020. This was booked on January 19, 2020 at with airline Aeromexico. The flight has been canceled due to Covid. It is now March 2021 and I can report that I have not yet got my money back and I do have vouchers (of 75% of the €3300 that I paid) but that I may also book me another €150 per ticket 'service fees' costs. I think Aeromexico are downright scammers, it really is a shame that they are members of Skyteam. A few facts: - I paid €3300 for tickets, which were converted into a credit in Russian Rubles without my knowledge so that they are now only worth €2600. Aeromexico filed for bankruptcy (Chapter 11) in July 2020, so they do not have to refund people who booked before that time. They don't refund money, to any one. You will automatically receive vouchers, but you have to pay a service fee if you subsequently want to book a ticket. I have vouchers for 4 people, which cannot be exchanged for 1 person. You must therefore go on holiday with a group that you would go with 1.5 years ago. Downright scammers!	0
We were denied boarding because we were one of the last ones to stand up. There was a long line of people waiting to board and the supervisor refused to let us board.  When we were on time and was a big line.  Do yourself a favor and don't use this airline.	0
Never use this airline - avoid at all costs. We flew in from Cancun and during our layover our flight got canceled to the states due to weather. Upon returning to the airport for our new flight, we had all of our documents checked by workers twice at the gate before boarding started. Then five minutes before boarding began an employee came to us and told us we were missing a customs paper. I had to run back to Immigration, file for a new paper, pay 600 pesos and then go through customs again to get back to my flight. When we finally got to the gate, they asked for our boarding passes and then turned us away. The lady at the desk said "you were one minute late" and shut the door. I was begging them to please let us in, when another gentleman walked up, showed his boarding pass and was welcomed on. We were not. We had to buy new tickets for $774 USD to get on the next flight home. No one would help us, all of the employees were rude or lied straight to our faces. I will never fly with this company again.	0
Aegean canceled our flight on 30th March because it stopped all flights to Athens from 26th March onwards. They refused to refund us because our tickets were not refundable. We filed a complaint asking for a refund since it was the Airline that canceled the flight and not us. They offered a credit voucher that can be used within the next 18 months.	0
Heraklion to Athens. I finally found a flight to get home to the UK during the Corona virus crisis, flying Aegean to Athens and then Swiss Air to the UK via Zurich. It was a difficult time and travelling was quite stressful given the situation. We travelled with hand luggage to avoid baggage claim. When my wife and I came to board in Heraklion the ground staff,  weighed our bags and asked for a credit card and charged us 80 euros for excess baggage. We would have expected more compassion. Swiss offered to put the bags in the hold for not cost and could not have been more sympathetic and accommodating during the crisis.	0
London to Athens. Aegean is anything but an airline! They simply should not exist! Business Class ticket and from London to Athens, the back of my seat was destroyed. While in Athens, they cancel the flight and then they ask me to pay more to rebook my flight! When I ask the agent to transfer the call to a supervisor, his response was “it is the airline’s policy not to allow the passenger to speak with supervisors”! Simply unacceptable! There is absolutely no reason for companies like this one to exist!	0
I booked a flight from Athens to Thessaloniki return. They cancelled the flights and never gave back the refund of the amount and they suggested either rebooking (with the fare difference paid by me) or a credit voucher with limitations, valid for 12 months. I said to them I want a full refund of my ticket and I disagree with these 2 options as I am not obliged to fly with them next time. They said that their regulations changed because of COVID-19 and they don't refund. I feel like someone stole my money. I still wait for a refund because they violated the rules of the ticket issued. For sure, the airline's policy shows how they threat passengers both aboard and on the ground in any situation.	0
I wanted to go to Ireland to shoot woodcocks. I brought my shotgun with all the related paper work: European firearm pass and Irish certificate. It was all validated at Paris CDG by the Aer Lingus team. And then they simply forgot to put my shotgun in the plane to Dublin. And even worse, they seem to have lost it. It has been more than 10 days now and they cannot find my shotgun. And the worst is they don't really seem to care. Their call centre has a terrible connexion, and the operators keep on saying they are sorry but they are unable to locate the firearm which is under their responsibility. I will never ever fly Aer Lingus again.	0
Came to Chicago O'Hare with a negative PCR test to fly back home to the Netherlands and declined, apparently University of Chicago is not acceptable? They could only refer me to do another test at the airport (20 minutes away) for  240 dollars! In the end we agreed on a rescheduled flight for September, but up till today I am still waiting for my new ticket. Luckily the KLM check-in desk was next to Aer lingus so I was still able to fly a day later without any problems. Many emails have been send in which a generic response and as of today I have finally received an email.	0
I booked my flights home for Christmas four months in advance to minimise the costs. Aer Lingus have informed me that they have taken the liberty of changing the times of both flights by more than 12 hours. I can now no longer take one of the flights, as I had booked for 10pm because I have a job, and they moved the flight to 9am the same day. There were multiple other flights the same day they could have moved it to, that were closer in time to the original flight. Because of their seemingly random choice, my options were either rebooking onto another flight and paying the difference (around £300) or cancelling the original flight and rebooking onto another airline (£230). Surely if you cancel the original booking, the passenger should either have a choice of when to rebook, or you should move them to the nearest flight.	0
This company has offered daily tickets to different destinations all over Europe at affordable prices during, and after, the COVID 19 pandemic restrictions.  Their strategy was to cancel those flights right before the 14 days period that the EU 261/2001 law stipulates. They would, after, offer you 3 options: full refund, Flight reallocation or voucher from company. I chose to get a full refund and, well, turns out that Aer Lingus Customer Services are one of the worst I have dealt with. I created an application form for the total refund of my flight tickets, which was never replied to. I have tried to call them several times with no answer. I have written several emails with no reply. And after all, they kept sending me emails re allocating my flight (the one that suppose to be cancelled for at least 14 days). Nowadays I am still trying to get to them, but no response. This seems to be the way they have been operating lately. I will not fly with this airline ever again.	0
Sydney to Beijing. This has to be the worst airline in the world! After herding us (pensioners) into a huddle at Sydney airport they left us like that for 6 hours and then tell us the plane is technical and go get a hotel and come back tomorrow (after 2 weeks they gave us AUD200 each). when we did they had cancelled us out of all our flights to Portugal and we had to get Flight Center to re-book us, they hadn't even booked us on the new flight. The staff couldn't give a monkeys about its pax and treated us like animals and were so arrogant. The queue even had a fight as people were so tense and the police were called.	0
Sydney to Moscow via Beijing. The worst airline of all time! Website and App are horrible, making online check in not possible. For example, on app, you cannot check in if you do not have a Chinese phone number. When you enter a code of a different country, it defaults back to Chinese. For long flights it is so crucial to be able to select a seat before all the good ones are taken. After 2 hours of trying and multiple customer care calls which brought zero result, I have last row middle seats on both of my flights (24+ hours journey time). Unbelievable! Customer care is useless as well: they cannot do anything about not working online check in and are not even able to tell at what time airport check in closes. This is the very least they should be able to advise. On the flight there is very little leg room (even for me with 165 cm highly), the wine they serve is of very poor quality, the meals are rather small. I will never fly with them again!	0
London to Beijing. Rubbish airline, they changed flights 5-6 times and the final change the day before departure. Unable to make change, so they cancel whole booking. They shift the responsibility to the booking agent despite the booking being with them and them making the change.	0
Amsterdam to Moscow. Overall, the inflight experience is OK, but nothing special. However the airline is terribly overpriced. The cheapest option you will find for Amsterdam to Moscow is at least €300. There are no other airlines flying this route without stop. It surprises me to see this airline, selling tickets from Amsterdam to Shanghai from just €350, but Amsterda to Moscow from €300. Note, that Amsterdam-Moscow is just a continental European, 3 hour flight with no onboard entertainment or anything special. KLM flies the same route charging the same prices. Now, I am flying monthly to Moscow, but not anymore from Amsterdam, but from Brussels, as it saves €100 per flight. I am strongly considering to fly with a layover in Riga from now on. Despite being an Aeroflot bonus member, and taking 23 flights last year, I have never been upgraded to anything, and never been recognised as a customer. On the contrary, when I had to change my plane tickets because of making a mistake with the dates (I contacted them within 1 hour after booking and went to the office within 2 hours after booking), they insisted that I had to pay, despite other airlines who change it for free within a reasonable timeframe. It was cheaper to apply for a new Russian visa with different dates, rather than to change the flight dates.	0
Venice to Guangzhou via Moscow. I arrived only with my backpack with a couple snacks and a laptop. The flight from Italy to Moscow was delayed and I lost the connection to Guangzhou, rapidly I got switched to another flight to Beijing and then Guangzhou, being assured that I would get my luggage too in Guangzhou. I knew that when you switch to a local flight in China you must get your luggage at the entry airport so I asked the gate crew and have been assured again that in this case they would take care of the transfer. Arrived in Guanghzou, of course my bag was not there. The Beijing-Guanghzhou flight was operated by China Southern, where I left immediately a report (PIR) then waited, calling twice a day Southern, Aeroflot and finally Beijing airport before knowing after almost a week that my baggage was waiting for me at the Beijing customs and they could not release it because it would need my authorization. No one from Aeroflot and China Southern ever informed me about this or gave me a clue that they even were aware of. Finally, I got my authorization delivered and my bag collected by a colleague in Beijing. Meanwhile, from Aeroflot and China Southern, I was still hearing that my luggage was in the follow up search.	0
On November 1, Aeromexico cancelled my flight to Santiago, which I booked through my travel agent, Chase. I requested a refund three times from Chase. Chase told me that due to the pandemic, Aeromexico inhibited Chase's ability to issue direct refunds to passengers, and Aeromexico's policy is to only offer travel credit even for flights that they cancel. Three and a half months after the cancellation, I still don't have my refund. Aeromexico is brazenly violating American law.	0
They oversell tickets then leave people on purpose at the waiting room to board. The last place this can happen to you is in Ciudad De Mexico. They were asking people to stay and will give them $300 well no one wanted to stay so they board the passengers that overpay for the ticket and told the rest that the plane was close already. Force me to exit the airport to go change my fly outside and outside they play games and they force me to purchase another itinerary for $1,500.00 when my original ticket was round trip from Los Angeles to Guatemala for $550.00 I had no choice unless i wanted to stay at the airport in DF.	0
I gave this rating due to my awful experience returning from Mexico City to Tijuana. I arrived at the gate for my flight AM0170 at 6.13 am on Feb 6th, 2021. The flight was scheduled for a 6.35 departure. As I ran towards the gate one of the two attendants at the desk immediately left and closed the glass door behind him. When I presented the remaining attendant with my boarding pass he scornfully informed me that I was too late to board. There was still 23 minutes before departure. I pleaded with the gentleman to let me board, but it seemed to me he derived pleasure in my denial as he informed me "You're two minutes late." On my boarding pass, which I still have it clearly states boarding is at 6.00 am. It seems unreasonable to allow less than 13 minutes to board. I was forced to buy another ticket at a much higher price without a single concession offered. I have never felt so mistreated doing business anywhere. I cannot in good conscience recommend Aeromexico to a colleague or friend and would in fact discourage anyone from doing business with Aeromexico.	0
In brief, they cancelled my flight and then gave me the run-around when I tried to get a refund. In July of 2020 I bought a round-trip ticket London-Cancun for a friend for travel in August. Three days later they cancelled their London-Mexico City flights for the entire month of August. I called to find an alternative, but they couldn't offer me anything, save for travel credit. When I said I wanted a refund, the agent said I'd have to write to a dedicated email address. The email was returned as undeliverable, so I opened a dispute through my credit card, figuring I'd get my money back that way. AeroMexico objected to the dispute, saying my fare was non-refundable they said I had credit to use within a year, minus a $200 no-show fee. A no-show fee for a cancelled flight. When I finally fixed the problem with their email address, they said that since I bought the ticket through a third party vendor (in this case Orbitz) I'd have to get the refund through them. Orbitz was helpful, but said they still had to go through AeroMexico for their approval before issuing a refund. Months went by, and all Orbitz could say was that the airlines are very slow these days and AeroMexico was not responding. So they have the manpower to object to my credit card dispute and keep my money, just not the manpower to approve my refund. I wrote to them several times about this discrepancy, but they never addressed that issue, just repeating I'd have to go through Orbitz. Let me add, I tried to be understanding. I can see that the airlines are strapped. I said I would accept credit in place of a refund if I could change the name of the passenger (which the rules disallow remember I got this for a friend) and if the credit were not time restricted (which, so far as I can see, just helps them out even more). They said they could not do that because their policies do not allow it. Of course, their policies are under their control. They could change their policy if they wanted to, or just make an exception.	0
This airline is a joke do not fly them unless you really need to be somewhere and there's no other option. I had to book a flight to see my mother before she died then I had to change my ticket for obvious reasons and they didn't care about the reason they still just wanted my money. They wanted me to pay a change fee that was as expensive as a new flight they put always profit before people. I ended up buying another ticket from them because that was the next available flight. This is really the worse service by far I have ever received from an airline and there are many really bad ones out there. Many airlines would have compassionate waivers in cases like mine but they don't care. Do yourself a favour and never book a flight with Aeromexico!	0
I bought and paid flex ticket Zurich to Corfu for late April, they cancelled the flight, no reimbursement, you have to phone to Athens but you never get through! No possibility by email, chat or online. They write that there are long waiting times for telephone connection but they don't solve this problem.	0
Athens to Zurich. A320 neo, space between the seats in economy class is a no-go. Never encountered such an uncomfortable flight. A320s don’t get much denser than that and that is what my knees felt. They also put in place reclining seats, so this nightmare even gets worse if the person in front reclines.	0
Last March I booked above flights to Dublin and then received an email to inform me that the flight was cancelled due to Covid. Further informed that no refund was available but a voucher would be issued in next 6-9 months. I then booked a second flight the following week to same destination and again, received an email shortly thereafter informing that this flight was also cancelled due to Covid. And again the same process of no refund, voucher months later applied. It smelt like a scam to me so I retried to book my original flight - dates, times etc.. and would you believe, the original flight that Aer Lingus had cancelled on me was still available to be booked on their website. So they were selling tickets on a flight that they had already cancelled. Only recently I did receive a refund of approximately half what I paid for the flights. They said it was fees that made up the difference. What a disgrace of an airline. Never again Aer Lingus.	0
While I have no problem with the fights themselves, I have a big problem with the way they have been dealing with the vouchers which they issued in lieu of cancelled flights. Our flights to and from Munich in March 2020 were cancelled because of Covid and I was given a voucher number immediately but I didn't get a pin code for the voucher until December 14th 2020 and in the meantime I had to pay for Aer Lingus flights in July 2020 because I didn't have access to the voucher. This year we again had flights to and from Munich and I did finally get to use the voucher, the outgoing flight was cancelled but the cost of this flight was not credited to the original voucher, so it seems that we've lost this money. Just yesterday I tried to add a 20Kg, bag for our return flight using the voucher and while it took the cost of this from the voucher it didn't book the bag, and I've spent 40 minutes waiting to talk to customer services, without success. The system is a complete and utter shambles.	0
They offered a steal of a deal during the pandemic. I knew I was gambling on most of the ticket fee, since it wasn't refundable, and I ended up having to cancel because hotels weren't open in Dublin at the time. They still owed me the $80 refund of the government fee. Aer Lingus claimed they had 'unprecedented volumes' and were overwhelmed. If they had half a brain they'd know that by offering all these flash sales during a pandemic they'd need to be able to handle cancellations and rebookings. I emailed them 3 times, no response. Six weeks later and no refund. Needless to say, I'll never give them any more of my money.	0
The flight was cancelled by Aer Lingus. Based on the Aer Lingus policy I am entitled to get a refund. Waiting for weeks now. No reaction at all. Apart from e-mails from "no reply" mail box. Impossible to contact Aer Lingus by phone (over 45 minutes waiting time).	0
Montreal to Bangkok via Beijing. Late (1 hour). Food not good. Staff not helpful and not friendly. Not able to get boarding pass electronically so had to wait 90 minutes in line at Bangkok. Had to wait in line another 90 mins to pass through various levels of security in Beijing. Staff yelled with a scary voice to buckle up when there was only a small wind blow and stopped movies at least 20 times per hour for the same reasons (very annoying) in a 13 hours flight.	0
Auckland to Beijing. Very poor customer service. My husband and I were not seated together for a 13 hour flight. When asked if we could be seated together we were refused. I was also flying with a sprained knee and had asked for an isle seat. I was again refused and placed in a middle seat which made it really difficult to to stand up and get in and out. Staff were unwilling to help and really didn’t care	0
Tel Aviv to Moscow in economy class. I've flown with Aeroflot four times.  On the good side the fleet is new, boarding experience is OK.  In Aeroflot economy class for some reason the drinks come 30 min after food. The flight attendants remove dirty trays only after the drink service. So, first you sit for 30 min waiting for coffee for you desert and after another 30 min with dirty tray.  The food in economy has plastic taste to me, on flights I've flown there is no in-flight entertainment, no in-flight WiFi.  Sheremetyevo airport is small, difficult to navigate (try to get from the arrivals hall to the departures hall in terminal D), bad traffic.	0
There was no priority boarding as was included in my ticket. We were boarded last (apparently a covid 19 measure) however, there was a huge crowded line for boarding which completely defeats the purpose. Additionally, no social distancing measures were implemented. Our so called “dedicated” overhead compartment was given to anybody and everybody and our luggages were moved farther away from us, to make space for other people’s luggage. No point buying their premium tickets because the services are the same, in-fact due to the covid measures you are better of getting the cheapest tickets and you will board first. Overall, they give empty promises and 0 services. Its an airline that calls itself premium but offers basic budget services. Overall don’t get high hopes about their quality.	0
They only provide instructions in Spanish. My husband and I were separated for a random security check. They don’t announce that it’s time to board. They also don’t put the flights they are boarding on the screen in front of the gate. We needed up paying an extra $700 because of their complete lack or organization when it comes to boarding.	0
My granddaughter was getting married in Cancun Mexico in May, 2020. We needed to reschedule our flight for January due to the resort closed because of the pandemic. Now, in January we are not able to fly because of COVID and were not given any type of refund or credit. Will never book with Aeromexico again.	0
Terrible customer service. I was on hold for over 2 hours to pay for travels fee and they kept disconnecting me. I had to call over 5 times to talk to a representative but they kept transferring me.	0
It’s one of the worst experiences I had flying. The check in is a nightmare, to get to the plane you take a 30 min bus ride, the flight was delayed. Avoid this airline even if you pay more! It’s not worth it.	0
They cancelled a flight, I requested a voucher in Oct. 2020, and it is May 2021 and I am still waiting. I contacted them per email, and on Twitter, and I have yet to see my voucher. They have promised to issue it several times, but they just want to keep customers' money. So I am back to travelling with Ryanair, because although their service could improve a lot, at least they are honest and upfront about every single expense.	0
I was flying from Edinburgh to Dublin to Boston in 2020. The weather was bad, so after two scary attempts to land us in Boston, they landed us in a small airport in Hartford, CT instead. This is fine-being safe. Once there, they sent a representative to talk to us. They were going to bus us to Boston, MA, which would mean my connecting flight to Raleigh would be missed (I had booked this separately). I spoke to their representative numerous times. (Oh and they had lost one piece of my luggage too, which they were able to find a few days later). The plan from Aer Lingus was to bus us to Boston and we would arrive between 1 and 2 in the morning. We were told that the airport would then be closed, but we might be able to get a cab to a nearby hotel, but they were not sure if any were running. Their plan was to dump us outside of Boston Airport at 1 or 2 in the morning. Remember, this is after 2 extremely turbulent attempted landings and a diversion to a different airport. I asked if they could put us up in the Hartford Airport hotel instead. I was told yes and that I would be reimbursed, but the fastest way was to pay it myself and ask for reimbursement later. I also asked about having to rebook my connecting flight that was missed, and was told yes, it would be reimbursed. I was lucky enough to have enough to pay for an unexpected hotel and extra flight, but not everyone may have been so lucky. I filed a request for a reimbursement through Aer Lingus website as told to do. It took over a month for a response and was told that they could not help me because I showed them bank statements and no the original receipts. I got the original receipts and sent them in. I was denied at that point because "there responsibility was to get me to Boston, not to pay for connecting flights or hotels." So-even though I was told directly by their representative that I would be reimbursed, and that their plan was to drop us off at a wintry cold airport at 1 or 2 in the morning with no accommodations, they feel they held up their end of the deal. Ridiculous experience. They do not care about their customers. Pilot and flight attendants were great people though. Sorry the company is under par.	0
I had booked a flight with aer Lingus but then the travel ban came into place around Christmas time and I couldn’t travel. Aer Lingus refuses to refund me and when I’ve queried this, I get emails about how I agreed to the terms and conditions. Absolutely no help or hope of getting my money back even though there was a government travel ban. Ryanair  gave me a full refund for my flight going the opposite end way but Aer Lingus have left me high and dry and made it very clear that they don’t care about me or my custom. I don’t intend to fly with aer Lingus again	0
Booked Q4 2019 for flight in August 2020, Covid struck and Aer Lingus pushed people to take a Credit Voucher with time limits that were not fair. Credit Voucher took so long to arrive (Jan 2021) and customer services stalled with will expedite, in final processing for months and months. Eventually I gave up and contacted my Credit Card company and requested a 'Charge Back'. Luckily you have 120 days after the flight was meant to have occurred. I ended up getting a 100% Refund thanks to my Credit Card company. Be warned Aer Lingus - You have lost a customer for how you handled me and this event.	0
They just got away with my $897 without offering an option of alternative. I booked a ticket SEA-MPX-SEA in February 2020, with outbound date June 2020. Due to COVID I cancelled they trip and got, through Expedia, a credit. Credit will expire tomorrow. Airline is forcing to book between January and February (2021) since credit from original ticket was purchased on February 2020. However, no flights are available in between both months. Airline not willing to extend credit to purchase tickets beyond February 2021. Also, not willing to move expiration date of credit from 31/12/2020 (tomorrow).	0
Rome to Sydney via Beijing. Terrible experience with the unprofessional behaviour with my child who traveled as an unaccompanied minor. After being told our child would be looked after in the Beijing airport we discovered he was made to sit in an office on an office chair for hours on end with no assistance or food. We had booked a lounge and it was not offered. The level of supervision was atrocious. He was let out with an unknown passenger who offered food and water. We will never deal with this airline again. They continue to deny any lack of duty of care towards the child.	0
Shanghai to Singapore via Beijing with Air China. Ridiculous Airline. 1) Flight delayed. Technical issues. Lady at counter extremely unhelpful. I am risking my connection flight from Beijing. 2) My food options not updated so I will go hungry. 3) No checks for business vs economy class. 4) Made everyone wait for 40 minutes before opening boarding gates. Dont rely on the time they provide on the boarding pass. For 11.55 flight, they opened boarding gates at 10.50! 5. Unhygienic toilets. Not cleaned even after asking. 6) Soap missing from toilet.	0
Los Angeles to Tokyo via Beijing. First and foremost, the service received was incredibly poor.  As our flight date came closer, we began double checking our flight information before we realized our seats were not listed on our tickets. This was an issue as I purposely paid extra to choose seats so we could of course sit together. After hours of being on hold trying to reach customer service via phone, it ended up being a waste of time as the line just disconnects. We decided to deal with it in person as we could never get a hold of a customer service rep. via phone. But low and behold, after arriving to our terminal gate, our seats were mixed up and we were seated separately. The rest of the ride is downhill from here. Need I say more, do not take your chances and be persuaded by the ticket prices and flight times. Stay away from this airline and pay more for more popular airlines.	0
I purchased a ticket from Mexico City to London on August 2, 2020. On August 9th, Aeromexico cancelled the flight. They did not even offer to refund the money paid for the ticket, as they must do by law. Rather, the cancellation message said that we could have an open ticket to any destination.  To this date (December 23rd), Aeromexico has neither refunded the ticket price nor honored their offer for an open ticket. All I get when I call the airline are lies and more lies -- first, they said that the money had already been refunded, and then that I would get a voucher for 115% of the ticket price, but none of that is true. The airline's latest communication was to send us a notice informing us that our claim was subject to their bankruptcy proceeding in New York. Yet another lie - that proceeding does not affect any claim against the airline that was created after June 30, 2020. They'll probably also claim that the flight cancellation was caused by Covid, although they sold the ticket and cancelled the flight in August, well after they knew all about the pandemic's effect on air travel. (I suspect that their plan all along was to cancel the flight four weeks out and just keep the passengers' money.)	0
This is a complete joke of an airline. They disconnected on me 6 times for two days and issued me a voucher with the wrong date of birth that I cannot claim. Not only that, I have to prove to them that they caused the error to get the new voucher issued. I ended up disputing with credit card.	0
It’s the worst airline I’ve ever traveled with they did not transfer the luggage is from one aircraft to another one we had a stop in Mexico for my next flight. Their customer service is the worst I had to contact them because they lost my luggage and kept it with them for days the day I received my luggage they wanted me to go pick it up at the airport and I said no they had to deliver to my home. To my surprise when I open my luggage everything was missing in my luggage her luck they had open my luggage and stole a lot of stuff in there they left me empty-handed, and the airline doesn’t want to accommodate me  and they don’t want to look into it. So don’t travel in this airline because customer service will not be held responsible or they will not help you at all. I had trouble before and the only problem is I had hat is it they have a lot of delays and other little things like those that I don’t care about but they stole a lock for my luggage I don’t even know how they opened it.	0
6 months waiting for vouchers. Rang them multiple times but they keep telling me it's not their department.  They won't put me through to the correct dept. or give me contact details for them. Just keep putting me off.	0
Like many other complaints here - Aer Lingus is basically getting away with theft - for myself - I requested a voucher almost 9 months ago in Mar 2020 and nothing. Pretty sad and sickening to see them using COVID-19 as an excuse to keep people's hard earned cash. There are quite a few complaints where we are talking thousands of dollars/pounds/euros. I have also been reading from other complaints - that even when people get the voucher after waiting many months that the voucher is being denied.	0
Absolutely disgusted! Booked a few days away in Edinburgh a few months back as a birthday present for my partner. Had rang around 2 weeks before my flight date to cancel as both Belfast and Edinburgh had went into a further lockdown. The advisor told me even though I couldn't get a refund as the flight hadn't officially been cancelled, that he could move the flights to the same dates next year due to "exceptional circumstances" free of charge. He then advised me to wait until 24 hours before my flight to do this as there was a chance I could get my money back in the event that the flight was cancelled. This was not the case however and when I rang to get the dates changed I was told by another advisor that there would be an additional charge of £168.00 on top of the £150.00 I had already paid. When I disputed this and told him about the previous conversation he became quite blunt and rude and told me to wait until 2 hours before my 7am flight to see if they were going to cancel it if I wanted my refund? Not usually one to write reviews at all, but I have never been so appalled or angry in my entire life, I think in the middle of a global pandemic, where people are struggling enough as it is, for an airline to blatantly rob people is beyond a joke! Basically, the fact that there's a lockdown means nothing when it comes to travelling, even though some people can not afford to take a further 2 weeks isolation period off work. I have handed Aer Lingus £150.00 of my money for nothing and have been refused a refund even due to the circumstances or even the basic courtesy of a flight change 1 year in advance. I have never heard of anything this disgraceful happening with an airline and I certainly will not be travelling the thieves again, and will be advising others not to either.	0
I had a flight from Edinburgh to Belfast this evening (Oct 26th, 2020), I wore a pair of gloves since I have a skin issue, too much hand sanitizer directly to my skin will cause bad eczema. However, before I got off the plane, a crew member at the gate suddenly spoke to me: “just a suggestion, you don’t need to wear gloves just washing your hands more frequently will be fine!” This made me feel offended and been judged by her, first of all she doesn’t know the reason behind, secondly I’m not here to seek her opinion, she really should keep her very personal opinion to herself! This issue made me feel really uncomfortable!	0
Bangkok to Barcelona via Beijing. Absolutely atrocious and an experience never to be repeated. The quality and standard of service prior to travel was non existent. The quality of the plane and standard on in flight service was very poor. On arrival at Barcelona, I was informed that my Baggage was left in Beijing. 3+ days later my bag was delivered broken.  Total compensation 18 euros. My expenses for the 3 days were greater than 18 euros, and how they think I can replace the bag for 18 euros is beyond me. Never Again. There are plenty of far superior alternatives. Was it cheap? Yes - but cheap usually means cheap and nasty - which it most definitely was.	0
Flew Air Canada Rouge twice this week. Booked thinking I was flying Air Canada. Knew nothing about the “rouge” brand. Both flights were delayed. They did not have sufficient time between flights to properly move planes or service them. Both flights were delayed. So 100% chance of delay. Rude staff who will cut the customers needing extra time off. The flight attendants made a guest put two bags below their seat so they could accommodate one guest who wouldn’t find her own open bag spot. Very rude service. First flight, boarded an hour late then sat for an hour waiting to push back as they didn’t have weights to fly. No offer of drinks or anything.	0
Bucharest to Shanghai via Moscow, the first flight was canceled by them and postponed to 6 hours later, of course the connection with second flight was lost. The operator in Bucharest can not reschedule the flights. Arrived in Moscow at 23:30 I go through the transit area where I get a new ticket for next day at 9:20, and they send me to terminal F for accommodation but here they told me that no room for me because " are many delays and all available rooms are occupied, give me 2000 rubles (34euro) and told me that I can spent it in some restaurants. I just ask for a bed because need to stay in airport 9 hours over the night and fly other 8:30 hours to Shanghai. As is seems they are not ready for such a situation or they think that few money can make people to forget their mistakes. Next time forget this airline.	0
Vienna to Delhi via Moscow. One of the worst airlines I travelled. They can delay flight or cancel the flight without any information then they  leave u on your own, not provide any accomodation or food, no representative there to assist you.	0
This airline is totally unreliable. First of all, trying to book a flight on the website is usually impossible, and when you try purchasing your flight over the phone, somehow, the flight prices are higher, even if online there's a cheaper price for the exact same flight. Today I wasn't allowed to check in and board my flight because I arrived an hour before the flight departure. I understand it's a policy to arrive two hours earlier, but I have never been left out an hour before the flight. As soon as I arrived to the desk the woman kept saying no without looking at me, no to everything I asked, even if her answer didn't make sense. I asked her to please give me a phone number and she didn't know anything. After I found one online and called, the person on the phone didn't know anything and said he couldn't help me, he could only purchase another flight for me. The staff are ignorant to anything there is to know about their job. I have never been truly helped by them.	0
COVID policy is a pure lie. I asked for a change on family tickets because my daughter is sick. They have me waiting 1h45 and ask me to pay a price higher than the initial price when it is very clear that planes are empty. I asked to talk to a manager, she made me wait 15 minutes more, then terminated the call. Total lack of respect, avoid at any costs.	0
Couldn't regret more to have booked in this airline. First, you can't do anything online, you have to call and it will take forever for someone to answer your call. Second, they want to charge me to change a flight, when I can't even fly cause it's not allowed due to Covid and when I mention that, they want to tell me there's no restrictions (they basically don't have the information), but luckly I had searched before and after a long call they would notice I couldn't fly, but still don't help. Should mention that they almost have no flexibility for changes (they don't care for Covid). Followed by terrible communication, not helpful or nice at all and can't even understand English well. After all, when I have a new day for my trip I will have to call again and spend God knows how much time (this one was about one hour). Honestly, if you have any chances of not flying, do not go for Aeromexico!	0
We missed our connecting flight to Larnaca twice due to delays first of Lufthansa and then of Aegean. We ended up with a route of 4 flights from Hamburg to LCA with total trip duration of 24 hours. The ground staff of Aegean at the gate requested me to leave my carry-on baggage at the gate to be picked up at luggage claim at LCA as the plane was full. I kindly explained that I’m traveling with a companion who had his carryon with him and we had to get a taxi together immediately after arrival. The ground staff showed no consideration and insisted that it is the airlines regulation. She spoke rudely with a loud voice.	0
My flight was cancelled for some reason the airline didn’t even had the courtesy or system in place to notify the customers. I came to know when I tried to go through airport security as they couldn’t locate the flight. The airline company sent no email, text message or updated the information online so that customers are aware.  I was put on a flight 25 hours later. I missed my work and had to figure out my myself the place to stay in the interim. I had to pay out of my pocket for the stay. When I called customer service they refused to help. The online customer service refused to help or compensate for cancellation as well. Now I wonder why would anyone with sane mind ever use such irresponsible airline company.	0
After months of sending emails and requests I finally received an Aer Lingus voucher for a flight cancelled in May. It now transpires that I cannot even use this voucher to pay for an outstanding balance on changing flight dates with Aer Lingus. Customer service has been absolutely appalling throughout.	0
Bangkok to San Francisco via Shanghai. What a nightmare. Staff did not recognize my Star alliance status and told me to que with the rest of the chaotic crowd. Seats are tight and the food is less than mediocre. To make matters worse, you have to go through customs in Shanghai, even though you are transiting. Never again	0
One of the worst experiences of my life. Our first flight after the pandemic to visit family for Christmas. We purchased these tickets 4 months ahead for our family of 4 as Christmas presents, so we could all go and relax and enjoy family time. The night before our flight we could only check in my husband and myself, it was giving us a note that we needed to come see someone at the counter upon arriving to the airport. We went very early the next day, try to check in our daughters again and the same notice came up. So we went to find out what the issue was and a guy at customer service very rude and unpleasant, notify us like nothing that the two tickets for our daughters were sold out to their own staff. I could NOT understand what was happening at the same time and why would they do that to tickets that were already paid 4 months ahead of time. Anyways after arguing and actually crying we had to leave our two daughters behind waiting there to get accommodations for the next day on the evening. With the loss of two days of their flights and my agony as a mother we left them behind. Because they could not accommodate all of us on the same flights now because everything was sold out. We wrote to Air Canada a complaint and the excuse was because of the weather their flight was delay. Not knowing that we already knew that the tickets were re-sold to accommodate their own employees. I will never like to use their service again. That was cold, calculated, irresponsible and lack of respect and responsibility to their customers	0
Flying two adults and a toddler. Summary of my experience: 12 hours waiting at the airport getting messages every hour that my flight was delayed. Cancelled flight at 10 pm and Air Canada did not offer a hotel. No meals offered. Customer service did not answer the phone. No one available to discuss my issue.	0
Likely the worst airline experience I have had, outbound YYZ to PHX on Dec 15, 2022 Air Canada suggested that we arrive at YYZ at least 3 hours before AC 1721 for a 9:25 departure, so we staggered in at about 6:15. At 7:23 the flight was delayed until 9:20 We then boarded the plane and waited on the tarmac for about an hour. Then we were ordered off the plane and told to take everything with us. At 10:14 the flight was delayed until 12:30. Gate agent scolded passengers because someone had used the plane's lavatory while it was on the ground, and apparently that was the cause for the delay. As if it's the first time in the history of air travel that someone used the plane's toilet before it left the ground. At 10:30 the flight was delayed until 1:30 At 11:25 the flight was cancelled and we were re-booked on AC 1723. Our seats were separated by 14 rows. No refund for premium seat selection that was denied because of the cancellation At 2:26 there was a gate change At 4:17 there was another gate change At 5:21 that flight was delayed until 8:15 Wheels-up after 9 pm. We arrived at our destination about 12 hours late. Compensation offered? A $10 meal voucher. I have travelled all over the world, and dealt with scores of airlines and hundreds of airline personnel. I have never met with such rudeness and condescension as I have with Air Canada Rouge. Worst Airline Experience Ever	0
Moscow to Rome. I was not lucky because I had a huge man next to my seat 9D. His left arm and shoulder were pushing me constantly toward the other side of my seat I was very uncomfortable. I moved to one of the free seats of row 8 (exit door's row) were 4 of the 6 seats were free. A crew attendant came immediately and ordered me to move back to my assigned seat because all seats of row 8 were already taken. Lie, we were already flying for more than half hour! I explained the reason of my change and I asked for another seat. The only one available was in the last row where seats don't recline and are uncomfortable. I expressed my disappointment, but it didn't change their attitude, justifying it with Aeroflot policy. I also offered to pay for the change with no result.	0
Heathrow to Hanoi return via Moscow. When we were queuing to board the plane we were called to one side and told the flight had been overbooked and as we had the longest connection time in Moscow we had to wait until the flight the following morning. We were put in a nearby hotel and went back to Heathrow in the morning and got on the next flight. On Aeroflot flights there's minimal drinks on offer, water, orange juice, or wine out of a paper cup. The food is okay, and the seat comfort average. When we landed in Hanoi we found out our bags had not come on the flight with us but the staff did not know where they were, nor could they tell us how long they would take to reach us. This is a huge problem when you're travelling around Vietnam for a month and in two days would be 1000 miles away from Hanoi where the bags would be delivered. We were given a number to call to check on the status of our bags but every time we phoned we were not given any information. A week later we were told our bags had been found. We arranged for them to be sent to hoi an where we picked them up. Absolutely no compensation from the airline, not even an apology. On our return flight our flight was delayed by 5 hours which meant we missed our connection. This would have been okay if Aeroflot arranged a hotel for us until the next flight the following morning. But instead we had to fight our way (literally) through queues at Moscow airport with hundreds of other delayed Aeroflot passengers to get our connecting flight booked, which was a 7am flight the next day. We were then told another rep would arrange our accommodation at midnight, the time now was 9pm. By midnight there was no sign of any rep. Other frustrated passengers started demanding information from the staff that were around but it was no use. At 3am we gave up and went to the gate to wait for 4 hours. The gates were full of hundreds of passengers, including babies and children, on airbeds they were handing out of a room at the end of the terminal. We queued for a further hour to get an airbed. By 4am we were on an airbed and had a couple of hours lay down in the cold airport before our flight to Heathrow. We tried to get good value for our food vouchers and we're able to get a tea, croissant and egg It was a nightmare to fly with Aeroflot.	0
Atyrau-Almaty-Bangkok. Atyrau-Almaty flight cancelled without explanation on the day making us stay in Atyrau for additional 2 days without offering accommodation. Replacement flight delayed twice. After we an hour in a check-in queue we were told that they ran out of seats on the plane leaving us and about 20 other passengers stranded. Offered tickets on additional flight on the same day but it was late to get on the connecting flight in Almaty. After 4 hours told that the additional flight was delayed. At 11pm it was announced that the flight was cancelled so we attempted to rebook. Told the next available flight was in 2 days which was unacceptable and we bought tickets with another airline. The next day we flew to Almaty with another airline and got on our connecting flight to Bangkok. As a result of the issues with Air Astana flights we had to spend extra money on the flights in Kazakhstan and Thailand.	0
They canceled my flight from Cancun to Huatulco and therefore I had to buy two more tickets and a hotel night when I contacted them they told me that they canceled the flights due to Covid but that no refund would be given to me. Me cancelaron el vuelo de Cancún a Huatulco y por ende tuve que comprar dos boletos más y una noche de hotel cuando me comuniqué con ellos me dijeron que cancelaron los vuelos por Covid pero que no se me daría ningún rembolso	0
Our nightmare began April 17, 2020 when I attempted to purchase online flights to cancun MX. I completed the purchase of 2 tickets when a pop up box informed me the transaction had failed to try again. So, I did. The second time the transaction went through and I that moment I checked my email for a confirmation and found that I had in fact purchased 4 tickets in the same flight to Cancun. I immediately called the customer service line and spoke with Adrianna who assured me that they would refund the duplicate tickets. She issued 2 refundable tickets and said it would be 4 to 8 weeks before we would see the refund on our credit card. In the meantime, in walks COVID and our 2 other tickets are cancelled so I call and I am assured we have the option to fly for up to one year after our flight was cancelled. All good right? Not at all! No refund ever happened on the duplicate tickets and here we are in August. Our other tickets appear to be issued for June 2020 flights and no flights existed at that time that we were aware of. Our trip was medical in nature and needed priority but, no such luck. We ended flying on American thinking we’d book before our year was up to use the tickets. I don’t know what was done but there were no flights I could find on AeroMexico in June. We are desperately trying to get a refund on one set of tickets and flights that were promised on the other two. I’m afraid we’ve lost our money and what recourse do we have?	0
AeroMexico canceled my connecting flight from Mexico City to Cancun. I had to book another flight. And got no help from their costumer service. They answered only a few days after my flight was scheduled for departure. And they could do nothing for me which I find completely ridiculous. Not even a flight change proposition. I demand a voucher or a refund. This is not fair.	0
Horrible experience. Flights kept getting changed right before the trip. The worst part was when my return flight was changed and it overlapped with my connecting flight home. How does this even happen? How can I be on two planes at the same time? Thankfully I caught this error before going to the airport, but Aeromexico should have reached out to get this sorted. On top of this, the fight was rescheduled for the next day, causing me to have to take an additional day off from work at the last minute. Boarding of the plane was unorganized and frustrating. Despite me paying extra to sit in premium economy, I was forced to board the plane last! This didn't make sense to me and caused me to have to check in my carry on at the gate because there wasn't enough storage space in the cabin by the time I got on the plane. This was my second time flying with Aeromexico. The first time my luggage was lost at one of my connecting flights and I was without my items for one week. I decided to give them a second chance this time, but this is the last time I fly with this airline. International travel is stressful enough and I shouldn't have to deal with incompetence and disorganization on top of that.	0
I did not even get the chance to fly due to COVID-19. I completely understand the situation what angers me is the company's complete disregard for its clients, their lack of ethics, and their greediness. It is almost as if they were using the current horrible emergency to scam passengers. I was bound to fly on the 4th of July the flight got cancelled, but they only option they gave me was an open ticket to any route and any destination. They claim that they are waiving change fees, but that I will still have to pay the fare difference. The catch is that I was initially flying MEX-CDG-TLV and CDG-MEX if now I want to change to say round MEX-IAH, I still have to pay a difference between 100-300 USD! If you quote a round MEX-IAH on this same company on the same date, you can get it for around the same price as the difference. Do note this: I wanted to fly on july 4th to attend a particular event and I decided to spend some of my money on that. The airline is unable to provide with the service I required, so I want my money back. Instead they tell me that they cannot give me my money back, in fact, they are penalizing me because they were unable to provide the service. Avoid this horrible company at all costs. When things go well, they are just another average airline, but when things go wrong, they show their true colors. Unfortunately, this is not the first time I have such an experience with this airline. I give them 1/10 just because I cannot give them a negative score, but in my head they have around -3.5.	0
Booked flights from Birmingham to Dublin, Aer Lingus rescheduled the flights from Heathrow instead, a month on and they haven't tried to get in touch or respond to my request for refund. They're coasting along on government grants and ignoring their customers completely. Disgusting.	0
I applied for a voucher because my flight was cancelled due to corona-virus, I received an email to say they had received my voucher request on 23/03/20. I have made two phone calls to Aer lingus the first one said they would escalate my request. In my second call they said they had no record of my earlier (two weeks previous) escalation. I was given an escalation number and I asked if nearly four months of waiting is long enough, the person hung up on me after getting through and her putting me on hold took about forty five minutes.	0
Waiting since 24th March for voucher refund, after a lot off emails they said it was emailed to me approx end off May but I never received the voucher. Since then no response to my emails and customer service is a disgrace. My rating is based on customer service only.	0
I was forced to cancel my trip to Dublin due to the coronavirus. The Aer Lingus system would not allow me to cancel my reservation online. Because I had bid on an upgrade that had not yet been processed I wanted to make sure to cancel before that bid processed. after many hours over several days trying to get through to their reservations department I was charged the upgrade fee. To cancel my flight I resorted to an email. I have spent the last several months trying to get the upgrade fee returned to no avail. I would not recommend this airline. Their actions during a global pandemic indicate they care about nothing but making money.	0
Los Angeles to Shanghai via Beijing. The flight arrived late into Beijing and I missed the connecting flight to Los Angeles. They made everyone wait in an area for forty minutes, then put everyone in a bus that got lost twice and took ninety minutes to get to a hotel. No food was provided, my bathroom had no shower door and had a clogged sink. I was the only Caucasian amongst all Chinese. Not a word of English was spoken. When flying from Los Angeles to Shanghai five days earlier the same thing occurred. My flight from Shanghai to Beijing was cancelled due to weather and I was forced to spend the night in Beijing. Rather than accept their accommodation I took the money they offered, forty six dollars and found a four star hotel that cost $250. Air Canada had its passengers stay at the same, pricey but reasonable, hotel. The following day, after spending three hours on the tarmac, without any communication from the pilots, the flight finally departed for Shanghai. Returning from Shanghai I was wiser but no less lucky. My flight from Shanghai to Beijing showed that it would be delayed and I knew I would miss my connecting flight to Los Angeles. An hour prior to the flight leaving I informed the airline staff that I would miss my connecting flight and requested they instead arrange another one. I even showed them flight options on my phone. The answer was no answer. I had to take the flight or be left on my own in Shanghai, not knowing what would happen. I took the flight to Beijing and was then taken to the hotel. I kept asking myself, why can’t Air China run some very simple regression analysis to determine the chances of customers making flights given variables like seasonal weather patterns and historic flight delays. The only answer I could come up with was they either do not think it is important or do not know how to do it. Why do airports in China suffer some of the longest delays in the world? As mentioned in the Economist, “The first reason is that its airports err on the side of extreme safety.” This is consistent with state run ideology. Play it safe. No mistakes, and you won’t get in trouble. According the South China Morning Post, “Like the rest of the world, the biggest cause of delays according to CAAC is the weather, which accounted for 56 percent of flight delays ” No one thinks this excuse is legitimate.	0
Milan to Fukuoka via Beijing. Bad Service. I booked a kosher meal for the flight. The flight attendant didn't checked the special meals, trying to serve me same as others. When I asked for the special meal, she returned to the galley and brought me an open box though it was written on it in big letters that it must be open ONLY BY THE PERSON WHO REQUESTED THE MEAL. DO NOT EAT IF IT WAS OPEN BY SOMEONE ELSE. After I complained, the flight service manager briefly apologized for the "little" mistake, returned to the galley and after a while brought me a small plate with a piece of a fish and salad from the business class. He was in a good mood, laughing, and obviously not comprehending why I refuse to accept the food, saying repeatedly that it was much better than my kosher meal. As a result, I was left without food. How could such a person be a flight attender MANAGER? I have never felt such humiliation and ignorance of passenger needs. Shame on Air China for the service! In addition to being left without food for a 10 hours flight, I got my checked luggage (a hard suitcase) at the destination destroyed by 4 big cracks.	0
Horrible! Would never use this airline again! They lost the luggage of 30 passengers (including me). Said that unfortunately they forgot to board the luggage on the flight. I'm still waiting for my luggage 3 days later, with no clothes, no medicine (that I need to use daily) and no answers! Horrible customer service, horrible service! Never again!	0
Traveled Air Canada rouge from Bridgetown to Toronto and back to BGI. To YYZ was not bad as there was just a slight delay. On the way back to BGI the staff was not understanding as I was traveling with medication and the scales were off as I had to use 2 different scales that gave different weights and I had to move around items and was advised I would have to pay $100 cad for 1lb of overweight. The staff were rude and very nonchalant about it. I requested fragile stickers for my luggage my luggage was brand new and there were a few items in my luggage that could break. When I received my luggage a it was dented and a wheel was off. I'm quite appalled by the service received as ticket price were extremely expensive seeing the space given for seating and no entertainment, having to pay for wifi and even water.	0
Mexico City to Cancún. Don't fly with this airline . During COVID 19 emergency they are still flying at capacity ! Nonetheless, when asked to be moved or why they are keeping flights at capacity I was left alone with a response of this is what it is, you wanted to fly to Cancun and this is what we have. Just not worth it . Estoy extremadamente preocupada y además dolida con el gobierno Mexicano al no poner restricciones de medidas de salud básicas. Estamos en una época donde la seguridad va más allá de la economía. Los vuelos están a capacidad en espacios reducidos y además de pésimo servicio al cliente Recibido por las azafatas . No obstante la única medida de regulación es la temperatura . Da tristeza tener que pensar que esta aerolínea no se preocupa por la seguridad de sus pasajeros y más solo en la remuneración económica.	0
I had a trip to Cuba with Delta that was cancelled amid Covid. I requested my refund without any problem. However, when i tried to get my money back from a cancelled flight amid Covid, it was horrible. To begin, I would like to say it was very hard to get someone. I tried all the numbers, the chat, no emails, messenger with a robot. Days of trying and waiting. I want to clarify that I understand this time that we are living, but in my opinion this was extreme. After exhaustion I finally was able to chat with someone. I wanted to change my flight to September. They wanted to charge me like $80 more per ticket and we are four. Just to change what was cancelled. For every written response I had to wait 5 minutes. It was not fluid. If you like it or not that's it. Pay more or lose it. Refund is not an option. They refuse to give your money back. The guy was telling me it was not their fault. It's not one's fault. You just suppose to take care of your clients. Lesson learned, do not flight Aeromexico. Not one can be happy with their policy during this time that we are living. Plus if I don't want to lose my money, I have to reserve before January and travel before April. I can't believe what they are doing. Getting rich at the expense of the crisis we are living.	0
Worst customer service ever. Rude customer representatives. Never flew they emailed me & changed my flight & date then cancelled due to Covid 19. Will not offer refund they decided to keep customers money with hope of them using it in fortune but I will never use this airline in my life & I will let everyone know not to.	0
Athens to Munich. The ground staff in Athens is unpolite and rude, if the onboard bag is 1-2kg too heavy charging them 50€. Calling each passenger to their desk who didn't book any extra baggage. I'll never fly with this airline again. The food on board is really bad for me.	0
I took this airline from Rome to Athens on July 30th and my checked in baggage was damaged. One of the wheels was missing and my suitcase was cracked. I went to the desk where they were handling this situation. I reported it and emailed them the day of the incident. I didn’t receive an email back until the end of August. One of their associates informed me that they can compensate for the damage and give me €80. I gave them my banking information, they said over and over again that she still needed an “Intermediary SWIFT code” as it is necessary for non-EU people. I went to my bank Chase, and they had never heard of that, so I called the wire transfer department at Chase and they informed me that the recipient should have the Intermediary SWIFT code. I already gave them the information they needed so now it’s their turn to transfer the amount. I still haven’t received my compensation from the airline.	0
I had a flight leaving March 15th 2020. My flight left at 930pm. A travel ban went into effect at Midnight that same day, 2.5 hours after my flight was to leave. My tour was cancelled, hotels closed, and I could not travel, or I would of been quarantined either in Ireland upon arrival or United States upon returning. With no tour we had to cancel flight. I was in a group that was to appear in the St. Patricks day parade in Dublin, which was also cancelled due to Covid-19. Aer Lingus wanted us to rebook our flight, and fly there by the end of the year 2020. We have no vacation time left.  The tour company in Ireland refunded our fare. Aer Lingus wont, saying they will only refund our taxes. Horrible customer service. Unrealistic expectations to fly there this year with the virus spreading globally, including Ireland. All essential travel is on hold. How can anyone even realistically plan a  trip like that at this time.	0
I am thoroughly displeased with customer service. I filed for a full refund in March when the travel bans were established. If I did not get a full refund, I intended to take the voucher. However, Aer Lingus only refunded my taxes and fees without notifying me. They still have yet to notify me that they closed my case. I called back as soon as I noticed the partial amount in my account. The first representative was very helpful and offered to send an email requesting a full refund since I was not told my options. However, when I didn't hear back, I called again. The next representative was very rude. She kept interrupting me and told me it would be denied and that I was at fault. She said my case was closed and they are not returning my money even though the flight is cancel. My main issue is my account was closed without my consent and without being told my options. I would have never taken the taxes and fees over a full price voucher. Now I am being shut down because they closed my case. They also will not send me any documentation to send to my trip insurance. I still have not received an email telling me my account is closed and why I was only refunded taxes and fees. Now they have profited over $800 from me on a service they are no longer providing over a technicality and loop hole of a situation.	0
Dublin to Chicago. Irresponsible airline! My wife and I had a “bucket list” vacation planned to Ireland including a return flight from Dublin to Chicago on Aer Lingus. Unfortunately the coronavirus pandemic rose and we decided to do the the responsible action and cancelled our trip . Another airline we were taking and all of our hotels were very cooperative and totally refunded our reservations. Not so with Aer Lingus as they refused to refund our money. Very disappointing from an industry that provides the vehicle for such a pandemic to occurr in the first place . I feel we were penalized for making a responsible decision to cancel	0
I have just used Air China for the first time and had a horrible experience. We traveled to Beijing from Houston late October with tickets bought in May. Our return to Houston was scheduled for October. We arrived at the airport to be told the flight was canceled due to aircraft problems to be told the following day that was a lie. Apparently, for financial reasons Air China canceled both Friday and Sunday flights months ago but didn’t tell everybody. Now changing a very long, costly international flight is already a very poor customer service, but not making absolutely sure everyone realizes such a major change has happened is the worst I have ever seen in an airline. To make matters worse we had to fight to get a hotel and were sent to a very very poor, dirty one. Food was promised to be included but we got there only the buffet consisting of cold chicken nuggets and old eggs were included. Real food had to be paid. When every airline would be trying to make it up, since it was not my fault the flight was changed, getting a nice hotel and food, and an upgrade, Air China simply got us even worse service. I also had to buy my own food since the option was not edible. I travel a lot, have used multiple American and European airlines, being frequent flyer on several. Air China is the worse. Ever.	0
Air China is the worst airline ever, their customer service is inexistent, they do not answer calls. On hold for over 2 hours each time and half their Phone numbers for customer service do not work / are paying. Their premium economy is a complete rip-off, you basically get the same seat as economy with one seat next to you empty. I will never fly this airline again and do not recommend anyone to fly it. With this type of customer service.	0
Houston to Beijing. The flight was good, but not the customer services and the website. The website is confusing even when we typed in the correct/exact ticket # and name it did not recognize our name and we can't do anything online for any change. Also when requesting the mileage to be added to my other Star Alliance frequent flyer # the customer representative behaved very rudely and without any courtesy, made me wonder who actually is the customer here. Will not fly with them again.	0
Frankfurt to Shanghai with Air China. Terrible service at check in counter and terrible online check in. They would not let me pick a seat online. They said many people have the same problem. I was at the counter 5 hours before the flight to check in. They gave me the worst seat in the front row and did not ask. Luckily there were better empty seats behind me, so I switched. So stupid that they don’t care enough even about business class customers to offer them a good seat. At least on the plane they were better.	0
They make you check your bags for a fee of 30 USD plus fees. Hence no traveller wants to pay this fee, and you therefore have 130+ people bringing on a carry on suit case. There simply is not enough room. Customers getting frustrated with one another when people move bags without asking. We left late due to the debacle of trying to find room for these bags. Not good when we are already going to be arriving back into Toronto after 11.30pm. Then they ask you take anything that is not a wheely suitcase and put it by your feet, which serves to only reduce the meagre leg room provided on these flight. What with zero entertainment and wifi that we have to pay for, I will never travel this airline again. Air Canada you should be ashamed that you operate this service showing your name.	0
Air Canada is the worst airline I have ever flown with. My family of four flew to Athens, Greece from New York and Chicago with a connection at Toronto. In addition to long delays, Air Canada forced us to check in our carry-ons. One of my son's suitcase never made it to Greece. Ten days later and we have no word about where the suitcase is. At the beginning we were told that the suitcase went to Paris but its traces got lost after that. The customer service is horrible. We spent many hours trying to call an Air Canada number we were given but nobody answered the phone after waiting on the line for over one hour at a time. Air Canada ruined our vacation. We will never use this airline in the future. Stay away.	0
Atyrau to Rome via Moscow. They gave me a hand written boarding ticket and a tagged my luggage with just a slip with FCO written on it . I questioned where is the electronic tag, how is my bag going to get to Rome ? It fine they said don't worry. When I got to Moscow I had to get a boarding pass for next flight to Rome and Aeroflot said they have no record of any luggage for me, I explained what the Aeroflot staff in Kazakhstan said and they said we don't know if your luggage will be on the connecting flight or not. Arrived in Rome, no luggage, I have contacted Aeroflot in Rome and Moscow and they could not care less about my luggage, second day now and no response from their lost luggage department. I have my trip in tatters, I need to fly to Croatia and I have no luggage and no idea if it will be found. Unbelievably shocking service.	0
Bangkok to Moscow. I selected a window seat and once I got to check in the lady said she was changing my seat, I asked is it by a window to which she replied yes. Once on the plane I wasn't given a window seat so this was the first of my frustrations. The plane was old, the screen was broken and not stay in an upright position. I found the staff not helpful at all. On the way home I bought a picture and Aeroflot charges me 100 dollars to fly my picture.  I will never fly again with aeroflot.	0
London to Tokyo via Moscow this month. The airline did not load my luggage on to the connecting flight in Moscow not once, but twice - on both my outward and return journeys. I flew to Tokyo from Heathrow with a stopover in Moscow. Unfortunately, the first leg of the flight was delayed by an hour or so (with no reason given). As a result, I was rushed through the airport in Moscow and was frantically ushered on to my connection. When I arrived in Tokyo Narita I was informed that my case was still in Moscow. It was two days before I received it at the address I was staying at. I did consider the idea that this could happen again on my return journey three weeks later, but surely not? Oh yes it could. This time there were no delays, yet when I returned to London I was told that my bag was still in Moscow and could take a day or two to be delivered to me. I was given a number to call that looked suspiciously like a mobile number and told that they could not guarantee when I got my bag back. Early the next morning, I tried to call to find out where my bag was. The number given went straight to voicemail. I tried to call it several times, but still nothing. I then tried to call the baggage customer helplines. All three numbers were busy and I didn't succeed in getting through to anyone over a five hour period. Calling the baggage handler responsible for Aeroflot at Heathrow was also useless, and they passed me another mobile number that also didn't answer. I then tried calling the Aeroflot desk at Heathrow, and was grateful to speak to a human being. The lady was very kind and eventually called me back to say that she had found my bag, and I could come in to collect it myself. I will never fly with this airline again. It seems there are lots of similar cases of this kind of thing happening in Moscow SVO airport.	0
I book a flight with Aeromexico a few weeks ago, now they cancelled the flight 2 weeks from the departure. They refused to refund the money that i pay, that it was a round trip from Chile to Canada, (not cheap), even if they cancelled the flight. Is not the pandemic, some planes are flying anyway, and airports are open for the people that need it and have all the requirements to do so. Is them, they are just taking the money from people and cancelling flights. The only option that they give me was an open ticket with them. That means, just 1 ticket. that also I have to pay the difference and also an expensive fee for service?	0
Unfortunately there was an aggressive man on the plane, he pushed hard against my seat several times when I put my seat back to sleep. The staff did not act adequately, the flight attendant even walked away when the man became physical (he pushed hard against my seat). Supposedly to get security (I think?), But the flight attendant returned alone. When I later stated that I did not feel safe and wondered aloud if it would happen again, the response was laughable. "We don't know if he'll do it again, ma'am." I didn't feel taken seriously and was very scared for the rest of the flight. I sat down somewhere else, and I never came back to it. I felt unsafe for 8 hours in this 10 hour flight.	0
I had a flight booked from London to Mexico City on 2nd April, obviously this was cancelled because of the coronavirus pandemic. I have since then spent countless hours on the phone trying to reach them as well as emailing them, they either never reply or just ignore what you say in your email. The Civil Aviation Authority confirmed that a cancelled flight has to be refunded if the passenger wants to, but Aeromexico refuse to offer any refund. Honestly some of the worst customer service I have ever seen. Aeromexico at least you've accomplished one thing, that is to persuade me to never fly again with you. Terrible terrible airline ! Do not fly with them - you with be riddled with problems if you do.	0
My flight was cancelled because of COVID-19, and they refused to refund me, like many other reviews suggest. I haven't received a credit either. I submitted a complaint to the U.S. Department of Transportation because flights operating in the US are required to refund passengers after cancelling their flights.  I also disputed the charges through my credit card company. Aeromexico is very unethical!	0
London to Santorini via Athens. Aegean charges an exorbitant price for minimal weight excess. Be sure you will be charged £55 for an extra kilo. It is certainly the most unfair airline I've ever been. There were no prior email warning/reminders, which other airlines have the decency to do so. Ryanair hanks way higher on fairness and customer service. I can securely say that I'll never fly with Aegan again.	0
Heraklion to Athens. First attendants skipped my son when serving water. When he asked attendant for water, she replied just a second and just went on serving other passengers. When I asked another flight attendant if we could get some water. She politely replied that was no problem and disappeared.	0
London to Dublin with Aer Lingus. Not the worst airline I have ever used, but the one that I would least recommend. Even though I should have been able to rebook my flight to a day later, it was simply not possible to get any response via email or phone. in the end, I was forced to the flight I didn't want to take. PS: I did get a response to my emails. Stunning three weeks later.	0
Prague to Dublin. Shocking behaving during coronavirus crisis. Despite coronavirus shutting down my country/borders I cancelled all my flights with Aer Lingus and they refund only 10 % of the price. Shame on this airline for not helping people during a global crisis and national emergency.	0
Shannon to Edinburgh. Terrible customer service. Despite Coronavirus shutting down our country / borders and cancelling all events Aer Lingus would not refund our booking. Shocking and appalling. Shame on this airline for not helping people during a global crisis and national emergency. Will never fly Aer Lingus ever again.	0
We are due to fly from Dublin in April to Izmir. Aer Lingus are offering a reschedule to an unknown date in the future and waving the admin fee or a voucher. I want an immediate refund.	0
Islamabad to Melbourne via Beijing. My overall experience was horrible. Air China may be good value for money but be prepared for all the troubles and headaches that you will face with this airline from their uncomfortable seats, not working monitors, stained and smelly seat covers, delayed departure (one day) to loss of baggage. With Air China you are like a guinea pig you don't know where the flight is taking you, you cannot communicate with anyone in China if you don't speak Chinese. Long story short - flight took off to get passengers from Karachi but diverted back being 5mins to land to Islamabad and finally took off again one day late from the city of origin Islamabad, arrived one day late in Beijing (transit) of course the connecting flight was missed because of the airline. Failed to accommodate me or compensate for anything - just gave 350 CNY = $50 AUD to spend 13 hours in Beijing airport. Resting charge minimum starts 180 CNY per hour and 165 CNY to take a shower. My luggage had to stay in Beijing as I couldn't pass through customs, the airline failed to get me my luggage and asked me to claim it lost when I get home while my luggage was one floor away. Spent 13 hours on a bench in Beijing then they arranged for me to take a flight from Hong Kong to Melbourne as there were no flights for the next 3 days from Beijing itself (according to airline) however there were many flights. So all the way to Hong Kong the airport closed while we were in the air - I understand the situation but Air China lands in a city (Shenzhen) where they don't have any staff, any counter, any office or anything related to Air China. So I was again stuck in Shenzhen immigration. Immigration was forcing me to contact the airline, on many attempts by using the officer's phone I failed to get through, the immigration gave up and forced me to buy the earliest flight possible from Shenzhen to get out of the airport. For 12 hours stuck in 3x3 meter spot, no one from Ari China showed up to help or look for the passenger who is their responsibility to arrange accommodation for and arrange the flights for. After 12 hours Shenzhen immigration officers forces me to buy a ticket and claim it back from Air China as we did not hear anything from them. Coming back home after and seeking reimbursement, took 45 days Air China offered TCV Transportation Credit Voucher to spend only with Air China within 12 months. Like are you kidding me, this travel I had was after 3 years and I know for the next 2 years I am not traveling anywhere so their TCV meant nothing but gas and air, after telling them I will not be traveling for the next 12 months they suggest I give the TCV to a friend or family. Like seriously is this some sort of a joke. I was forced to buy another ticket twice more expensive than the entire return trip while I had already paid for one and Air China failed to provide any assistance and service for, they ask me to pass the voucher to family and friend. I earned that money, it is a whole month worth of rent to pay here in Australia and they ask me to pass it to a family or friend. None of my friends or family would ever travel with an irresponsible airline after what I had been through took me 4 days to get home (Melbourne). I do not recommend anyone to fly with Air China. Seriously, pay $100 more and fly with a decent airline that covers their shits and takes responsibility.as	0
Madrid to New York via Toronto. Air Canada has the worst customer service and - well, service in general - of any airline I've ever flown on. Countless delays followed by several cancelled flights, no help from "customer service", non-existent support when you try to call and make contact. I could go on and on and on. Plus good luck trying to get reimbursed for their incompetence. This is basically a criminal organization masquerading as an airline. Avoid at all costs.	0
Booked and paid for Premium Economy seats, but due to their wrong rows numbering, got regular seats. Food was no different from other passengers. So the Premium is simply a scam. The flight attendant was rude. She likely missed the class how to be courteous and how make passengers feel good. I am a frequent traveller so I am qualified to say Air Canada is from far, my worst flying experience ever.	0
Worst experience ever. They kept changing the flight time, we had to over go a delay of one hour and when we finally got to the airport we waited for an extra one hour because there was another plane in our spot. Not recommended.	0
Rome to Moscow. The only good thing is the food and the flights leave on time. Nobody smiles at me. No TV or radio on this short flight. They provided Russian newspaper.  They lost our luggage. and it's our 2nd day without our bags.	0
New York to Los Cabos. This is the most insensitive/money hungry airline I’ve ever had the displeasure of doing business with! My mom and I planned a trip to Cabo. However, due to COVID-19, we were on lockdown and as a result the date I booked the ticket for wouldn’t work. My mom is an essential employee and would not be granted the permission to take days off from work. Additionally, the extension date we were given would have coincide with my school. I explained I didn’t necessarily want to cancel my trip, I would have been fine with a later date then their deadline. They refused to change the date or give me a refund. Mind you I’m not an essential worker and lost my job due to the virus. They didn’t at all care, the only thing that mattered was their money! If you can’t count on a company during a tough time like this, when can you?	0
I don't recommend Aeromexico. I had a return La Paz to Mexico city and they canceled it probably because there were not enough passengers. Immediately, I tried to call the call center in the United States, without response then Canada, without response, then a center in Europe, without response, too. I ended up buying another flight, so an additional cost with an expensive cost with the time spent on the phone because the internet was bad, and I couldn't call by Skype. So I wrote to their complaints department to request the reimbursement of half of my ticket (I made Mexico La Paz) which took weeks to answer me. And the response was up to Aeromexico's indignity. "After a careful review of your case, we are sorry to inform that we will not be able to grant your request. Please allow us to share with you the reasons behind our decision: unfortunately, since your flights were canceled as a direct result of the regulations enforced during the COVID-19 threat, no refunds can be offered under those grounds. Nevertheless, since your flights were canceled due to the COVID-19 threat, your ticket qualifies for our protection policy that would allow us to rebook your unused flights, with the same traveling route and cabin, at no cost to you, as long as the new flights are completed before February the 28th of 2021.  If the aforementioned policy does not meet your needs, you can make use of our flexibility policy that would allow you to make use of the value of your unused flights and change your traveling route or cabin, to book and complete your new flights before February the 28th of 2021 however, in this case, as there would be a change of route or cabin, if the value of the new flights desired exceeds the value of the original ones acquired, the difference in cost would have to be paid.We apologize for the inconveniences this decision may cause. We hope that you find our airline’s efforts useful." The answer was in April and my flight in March and their inaccessible call centers probably because they canceled a lot of flights. Aeromexico has no sense of service and no respect for its passengers.	0
Bogota to Oaxaca via Mexico City. Given the current Covit-19 Pandemic and flight calculations world wide, an the fact that AeroMexico canceled and changed our flights five (5) times and on the fish time they did not provide a flight for the first flight [Bogota, Colombia, to Mexico City, Mexico] of our trip with them. And the fact that the last flight [Mexico City, Mexico, to Oaxaca, Mexico] was scheduled to land over 23 hours after our original booking time of arrival. We could not leave our home country so we had to cancel our trip and all flights. Every Airline carrier refunded our money except for AeroMexico who will not give us our money back. Complaint: It is a fact that we purchased two [2] Basic fair tickets, that Aeromexico clearly states are non-refundable. But I find Aeromexico’s business practices morally questionable and their rules and regulations to be deliberately vague and lacking in transparency. As they are able to place all of un-natural and natural occurrences and squarely places the blames on shoulders of its customers. Take for example the current Covid-19 pandemic. People, families, and whole nations are being quarantined by their local governments. And there is a very large percentage of people who last month had a full-time job, had money to do what they wanted in life, and did not know that their job my be on and will most likely be placed in unemployment until this pandemic can be better managed by the world. And at the same time people have to worry about meeting basic need and essentials [food, medical]. Then there are companies like Aeromexico who refuse to return their customers money when the service provider cannot provide a service. In the current humanitarian crisis that this pandemic is causing people all over the world, it must be nice for a service provider to take money for a service that their clients can’t possible use and then provide only two [2] forms of compensation (1) new reservation at a later date, (2) or an open book-ticket. But given the epidemic and the growing percentage of deaths worldwide. It seems to me that people should get their money back so they can use it take care of themselves and their family. And yet it seems financially advantageous for a company to keep their clients’ money giving this worldwide Covit-19 epidemic and the fact that your clients have an ever-growing chance of dying from Covit-19 and get to keep that money for basically doing nothing. I find this possibility sickening and I hope this is not a business practice of AeroMexico. As a customer myself who cannot travel because Covid-19 and whose money you are basically trying to steal because I need it back and for the fact you canceled our original flight. I hope that I can get my money back. As it stands I am just unhappy customer who will never forget this.	0
London Heathrow to Mexico City. Avoid. Their notion of Customer Service, doesn't understand what a Customer is, never mind the Service. Being told by the British PM to "not leave your home" because of COVID-19 was not understood as a reason as to why my flight needed to be cancelled. Asked to move it to another date - they did not understand how that would be possible. Utterly useless. Also, way overpriced, unless you get me there in half the time, review your ticket prices. It's a joke.	0
Chicago  to Dublin. Due to the pandemic I decided not to fly to Dublin tomorrow as planned. Aer Lingus refused to refund or exchange my ticket. I understood that was the case when the ticket was purchased last November, but under the circumstances I would think the airline would work with us. However, they refused to do anything and said it was our choice not to go on the trip. Why would we travel when everyone is advising against it. I'm very sad to cancel my trip but Aer Lingus is making it worse by not refunding our money. I was told if my ticket was purchased after March 6 I could get a refund. Who buys an international ticket that close to a trip date? My flight is scheduled for March 15.  I will never recommend this airline to anyone.	0
The response from this airline to the Coronavirus is highly unethical. I had a flight to Dublin, yet the government of Ireland announced the country was going to be on lock down due to the virus . I was not willing to get stuck there nor risk my health, yet the airline imposed a 100$ fee to change flight and the change difference ranged from 300-800 for different dates. They are offering no options to customers other than forfeiting all amount of the trip, knowing there is an epidemic. Most of the other airlines at least have offered to cancel fees for changing dates. This is the worst airline and obviously have no human values within their company.	0
The response to the COVID-19 situation by Aer Lingus has been lackluster to say the least. Aer Lingus has literally not a single mention of "COVID" or "coronavirus" across their website, even as they have shut down all flights to and from Italy.  Also, despite the "Avoid Travel" warnings from the US CDC and State Dept, they offered no flexibility in terms of changing my existing flight to Rome, but once I was here, they axed all flights to and from Italy. After they had cancelled my flight, I called them, and found they were unable to accommodate me in a flight from Geneva, which they serve, and is the nearest location they serve that's accessible by train. Also my understanding is they would have charged me any fare difference for such a flight. RyanAir saved me in this situation with a direct flight to Dublin, and honestly they are leagues beyond Aer Lingus in terms of response to the COVID situation. The Aer Lingus cabin crew are excellent however, shame the leadership at Aer Lingus has done such a bad job planning and responding to the COVID situation.	0
Toronto to Dublin. It is astounding that Aer Lingus is not allowing people who have existing bookings (ours is for tomorrow - Mar. 11) to change them without the per person / per direction change fee, which is not cheap. They have announced that new bookings can be changed with no fee, but are not making this policy change retroactive. I'm not even asking for a refund - a credit for 12 months would be acceptable. I live in Canada and have always flown Air Canada internationally, but decided to give the flag airline for the Republic of Ireland a try this time for our first trip to Ireland. Friends of ours have gotten credit from Air Canada, so I guess I have learned my lesson. My understanding is that most airlines are allowing changes with no change fees. We are so disappointed to have to cancel our trip to Ireland - our daughter was in tears. We feel very badly for the small businesses in Ireland, like B&Bs and hotels, but they were all willing to give us a refund, even when rules should have prevented it, but not Aer Lingus. If Aer Lingus won't offer flexibility, we won't be using Aer Lingus in the future, and I will actively recommend to anyone who will listen that they shouldn't either.	0
Boston to Dublin. We had to cancel our flight due to the virus outbreak and they would not waive their change fee of $600 to change our flights to the Summer, they will waive all change fees for new customers only, clearly sending the message that they do not care about their current customers while whey are trying to entice new business. It is times like this that a company shows its real corporate morals and what they really think about their customers. This is not how one builds customer loyalty. We will never book with them again.	0
Beijing to London. After I got off the plane, I found no baggage, I found that there was no result for about two hours, and there was a suitcase that was exactly the same as my suitcase. Brand, model, color are the same) has been unclaimed. After the airport staff said that let me "contact Air China, Air China has passenger contact information" and gave a baggage agency company list file number, and said it would help find, after the exit my son to China Air China The phone was transferred to the baggage office, and then my son suggested that the airline contact the owner of the unclaimed box. Then the customer service said, "Sorry, our airline does not have the customer's contact information, but we recorded the file." And said it twice. My son contacted GBS baggage agency at 7:30 pm London time on the 29th. During the exchange, the staff called "this passenger took the wrong baggage", but the baggage was not found. After that, I called again at 11.59 in the evening. The customer service still said that if there was any problem, "please contact the London airport", after my repeated questioning, the customer service changed the name and said "Contact China Air China's partner company at the London airport" Third-party outsourcing companies are completely unable to provide effective and reasonable solutions. When it comes to allowing Air China’s partner companies in London to reply to the process of this incident every day, the customer service said that "no permission, no idea, only message", in my After mentioning the compensation, the customer service said that “the baggage will be searched for within 21 days. If the baggage is not found after 21 days, the baggage tag will be lost and the airport will be compensated.” But as far as I know, it is only passive waiting to find the baggage. The person who got the wrong baggage contacted the airport, but until now, Air China did not receive the wrong number of luggage.	0
Rome to Bangkok via Beijing. We had 2 problems with this airline, and recommend you to try to fly with another company. Beijing to Bangkok with scheduled departure at 2:15 PM when we reached the gate, nothing was written about a potential delay after 1 hour (at 3:20 PM) I went to the desk, and the girl said to me these words: “flight is in delay, no more info available”, so we didn’t know when it was going to depart, and not even the cause. Long story short, after going several times to the gate desk with nothing or poor answers given, the flight departed at 6:50 PM, and landed at 11:50 PM (scheduled at 6:35 PM). Had the most terrible Customer Care Assistance experience: return flight from Bangkok to Rome, we had a transfer of 7,5 hours at Beijing, and reading at the company’s policy we saw that we had the right to have an hotel room. I tried multiple times to book it via web site, but it always crashed (I tried something like 50 times in 2 weeks) called the hotline, and after 6 minutes it always would go down (payed money for every call) at Bangkok, we asked for help (before doing the check in), and they said that they couldn’t do anything, and that at Beijing for sure they would’ve fixed. Landed at Beijing, we went to the Lounge, cause Air China Desks were not present (as in Bangkok), and the only thing that the girl at the desk did was call the hotline (really, I am not joking) at the hotline, they said 3 different things: 1) first, that we needed to book the hotel at least 2 weeks before 2) then, that we had to book the hotel at least 24 hours before 3) in the end, that their policy is to book at least before checking in after a 1,5 hour call, in the end, I even tried to ask if it was at least possible to stay in the lounge, and they said: “sure, but you’ll have to pay”. One last thing, the girl's supervisor at the hotline didn't speak English, only Mandarin. After what I’ve been through, I will stay as much away as possible from this company, and I advise all of you to do the same. Embarrassing company.	0
Vancouver to Islamabad via Beijing. One of the worst airline experience. First delayed or lost luggage for 3 weeks. Then 2 piece completely damaged. They are offering free hotel outside Bejing Airport but it's scam since they know that airport would not let you out at all. We were family of 5 and stuck at airport for 24 hours among lot other families. Transit lounge booking is also pathetic. Bad food seats and customer service. No or very few English - great barrier. They offer cheap rates but worst service.	0
Los Angeles to Bangkok via Beijing. Absolutely positively worst airline in the business. Horrible service, horrible business class. The lounges are an absolute joke. Never consider them again, no matter how much the cost.	0
Quebec to Montreal. Multiples change and revised time because of technical issue.  Never again will I use Air Canada Rouge or Air Canada if I have other choice.	0
Worst flight ever! First off no entertainment at all not even charger port not even a usb plug.! The seat was so uncomfortable and I had a preferred seat? I was sore all over from that flight. The snack part annoyed me, when am flying to Jamaica with a air bistro voucher it's a meal and 2 snacks but, when am flying back to Toronto it's a meal and 1 snack for the same price. I am in shock that any sun destination you pick with Air Canada you're stuck with Air Canada Rouge. Absolutely terrible. The staff was cold and stand offish. Never again will I fly this airline.	0
Boarded SU213 from Hong Kong to Moscow at 11am on July 6th 2017, waited for 4hrs and then told to get off the plane and come back 8hrs later. We came back and boarded and again sat for another 4hrs and once again asked to get off the plane and the flight was cancelled. We decided to cancel our Moscow tour.	0
I have been thoroughly disappointed when they cancelled my flight in the very last minute. Flight cancellations are not rare occurrences, of course. However, the way Aeroflot handled the cancellation left a lot to be desired. I was notified by my travel agent initially via email and apparently, was extremely shocked. I then phoned the agent but to no avail and given that there was no after-hour support in my region, I called their reservations hotline in Russia, only to find that some of their staff did not even speak comprehensible English. To complicate things, they denied the reservations code they themselves supplied, claiming that there was no numbers but only letters, when it clearly contained 2 numbers! After a rather unproductive 5-minute conversation where the staff kept prompting me to repeat and verify the reference code, they asked me for the ticket number. Guess what? They then forwarded me to another service agent, kind of implying it was a special case and they couldn't handle it. When I was finally connected, I was asked to supply the reference code again and they once again said their reference codes do not contain numbers. Of course, that member of staff also ended up asking me to quote the ticket number and sounded hugely impatient when I said "hold on let me retrieve it" with a long and deep breath. Mind you, it took me less than 15 seconds to retrieve it. When I finally started quoting the number, that staff member did not respond until I repeated a few times the first 6 digits and the deafening silence caused me to think the call was interrupted. Yet, after a few "hellos" he finally went "CONTINUE!" and that was one of the most impolite commands I'd ever encountered in phone conversations with airline personnel! To make things worse, he then said he needed to check my booking details further and put me on hold without even saying anything like "please hold the line". After waiting for 20 minutes, the call was disconnected and no one ever rang me back. I had had enough and decided to book myself on another airline.	0
Berlin to Athens. Aegean are in most respects an excellent airline. But you should be warned never to buy goods from their in flight shop. I bought a pair of Bluetooth headphones. They were extremely uncomfortable not being large enough for an average adult male head. It was clear from the moment I put them on that they were not "fit for purpose" and only really suitable for a child. Aegean refused to take them back even though from my point of view the goods were faulty as no adult male could wear them comfortably. So experience the excellent service Aegean provide but avoid the temptation to buy goods in the air. If they are totally unsuitable you won't get a refund.	0
Very dissatisfied with Aer Lingus’s customer service and policy concerning flight change charges due to corona virus. Disappointed with their unsympathetic response, especially since other airlines are waiving change fees due to this crisis. Am of course willing to pay the additional charge for a summer flight, but at this point, will never use Aer Lingus again and advise family and friends to look elsewhere. Not customer friendly.	0
Los Angeles to Bangkok via Beijing. The worst business class flight of any airline hands down - just cheap. Just attempt to reach them by phone. Well the phrase rings true " You get what you pay for". At any cost of savings absolutely not worth it - save yourself the trouble.	0
Toronto to Holguin. If you want to ruin your vacation and not get the compensation you can choose Air Canada. This if the right company to help you with it. Also you will have a lot of troubles to get in touch with reps to try to resolve any problems with either Air Canada or Air Canada Vacation. I will never ever use this company again.	0
Vancouver to Lima via Mexico City.  I bought a ticket 3 months before my flight. It said last ticket and I wanted to be on the same flight with my wife and mother inlaw. So buying it under impulse it was $1650.00. Then my wife paid another $500 to get upgraded seats so we can all sit together and we have a baby. So she decided to check online a week ago if there was any seats available on the same flight. And behold there were many. The price was $1200. Then my wife emailed customer service and they told her nothing they can do. She then decided to check our seats, and they never did upgrade them. So I called them. I was on the phone for an hour until I finally asked to speak to a supervisor. He said to check my email and they will upgrade our seats. I waited and no email. 3 days went by and still no email. So I called again. They looked into it and asked us for more money to upgrade the seats. I told them I'm not giving them anymore money. After 2 hrs of arguing with them, they finally gave us the seats. They wouldn't do anything to adjust the price. They wouldnt give us anything for their mistake. I was so stressed with this. We'll see if they even give us the seats that we paid for when we fly next week. I will never fly with them again, even if it's for free. They are the worst business ever.	0
Amsterdam to Mexico City. This is the worst airline ever. The seats are tiny and you cant move at all and really hard. The good is awful and you get two small meals on a ten hour flight, and one glass of water. The staff is rude, unfriendly.	0
Kansas City to Cancun. I booked through google flights and in the process somehow the dates of travel were changed. I booked the flight so I messed that up but I called the booking agency and they said they would take care of it. They tried to change my flight but Aeromexico wouldn't allow it. I reached out to Aeromexico and asked them to let me switch flights, they had open flights on the days that would work and I was happy to pay the increased fee for the new flights. The travel dates I needed were sooner than the booked flights and since they had open seats on the flights that would work I don't see any reason why they wouldn't have let me switch flights even if I was charged to do it. Their recommendation was to get on the plane anyway, knowing that it was after my work conference was over. Needless to say I won't select this airline again since now I'm going to pay for my ticket twice.	0
San Francisco to Mexico City. Horrible customer service experience. Booked Aeromexico operated flight through Delta, and while seats showed as reserved on Delta's side, it was impossible to verify this on Aeromexico's system (the carrier actually operating the flight). Apparently, every time I logged into Aeromexico's website, it automatically erases my seat selection, which is insane. Therefore, I had no guarantee that the seats were actually reserved! Horrible customer experience in this day and age	0
Athens to Bucharest with Aegean Airlines. This company has services which go from bad to worse. Last year they were bad, now they are worst. Much worse. The tagging of the luggage was a never ending process with maximum bothering system, consisting in 3 different people from the Aegean trying to use scanners which were not working and redirecting us from one to the other. The process lasted long to infinite because we were seven persons in the group. Moreover, after that, when boarding the bus which lead to the plane, the personnel insisted in a more than aggressive voice and body language in us going into a very crowded bus in which there wasnt any room left for us. More than that, we explained that we could not separate the members of our group because we were 7 and not everyone was speaking english. They separated us nevertheless between two different buses and one of the passengers had a panic attack. We are very malcontent and disappointed with the attitude of the people working for this company with which we interacted during this flight. And the flight was 45 minutes late, of course, this could not have missed from the final picture!	0
I was flying from Frankfurt to Boston via Dublin. At the counter in Frankfurt I and about 20 other passengers were told by Aer Lingus staff that they would not check us in because Aer Lingus flights that day from Dublin into the US were cancelled. They did not give an explanation as to why although later I was told that it was 'operational problems'. We were sent to a separate desk with generic airport booking employees unrelated to Aer Lingus for rebooking. These airport people had to call the regular Aer Lingus hotlines in order to be able to rebook anyone, but these hotlines were busy for more than an hour, and the Aer Lingus people in those call center were only allowed to process 3 rebookings in a single call, drawing this whole process out unnecessarily. During this time the flight to Dublin had departed and the original Aer Lingus front desk people had disappeared. It took 3 hours until my rebooking was looked into, at which time most alternative transatlantic flight options for that day were gone. So were all the options with any of their partner airlines with which they allow free rebookings (of which there are few in the first place). So I was told to take a hotel and wait for a flight the next day.  I instead had to book a flight for the same day via British Airways via London on my own and had to pay over 2000EUR for that. Most of that money I now have as a loss, but at least according to EU regulation Aer Lingus owes me a compensation of 600EUR which would at least pay for a part of it. In phone calls and mail communication they have now started to claim that the flight had not been cancelled it had only been delayed and they don't owe me compensation. I checked the flight history on Flightaware and saw that EI0139 on 1/7 did indeed fly. The reason for this mess up I can't fathom. In any way, since they barred me from the flight, they owe me 600EUR regardless if the flight in the end would have been possible or not. While I'll eventually get the 600EUR, the time and money wasted so far both with the situation during the trip and dealing with them in the aftermath is enormous. And greatest is the disappointment with Aer Lingus. I have flow with them a couple of times and from those experiences had thought them to be a half way solid airline. But the level of disorganization that they have shown that morning in Frankfurt dwarfs anything I have ever seen before.	0
New York to Bangkok via Beijing. I've been traveling for years and this is the 1st and last time I will ever use them. I just got married and my husband and I planned a 2 month honeymoon to Asia. We purchased a round trip from JFK with a layover in Beijing before arriving in Bangkok. The return flight was from Hong Kong with layover in Beijing before landing in Newark, NJ. Our flight in April to Bangkok experienced multiple delays which caused us to miss our layover in Beijing by 5 minutes. We actually had a 75 mins layover in Beijing, but due to the delays, we and almost everyone else on our plane missed our transfers. They couldn't tell their other planes to wait 5-10 mins for everyone to make their flights?? Instead, we saw most of the fliers crowded around the Air China counter. Everyone had to get a temporary visa and herd onto their buses to spend a night in a disgusting, filthy motel because the next flights out were the following day. My husband and I missed our 1st night in Bangkok and of course weren't reimbursed in any way. Throughout the ordeal, we saw all of the passengers at the Air China counters and they, like us, were appalled and furious with their lack of customer service. They just don't care. Now for our flight returning back to NY from Hong Kong on 6/17. We received an email saying that Air China changed our flights so we called Chase Travel. We saw that they changed the planes, times and moved us from Premium Economy to Economy. Why? We paid the extra amount for Economy. Once on the phone with Chase, we selected another flight for 7:30AM that was Premium Economy. We even waited on the phone until we received the email confirmation from Chase for our new flights. So on 6/17 we get to HK airport to check in and they only have my husband's name and not mine. Air China said I was on a 11PM flight and that it was Chase's fault. That was not the case. My husband and I spent hours on the phone with Chase and Air China, and Air China were the ones to cancel my ticket (we have no idea why). Instead of just putting me on the 7:30AM flight, they kept my husband on hold for 50 minutes, then finally told him that they could change his flight for $4000 to be with me for the 11PM. How does that make sense? Why are we being punished for Air China's mistake? They changed our flights then split us up but putting us on different flights that land in different airports. Then they have the audacity to tell him to pay $4000 for him to be on the 11PM when they could've just put me on the 7:30AM which was confirmed. They could have even put us on the next Air China flight after that. My husband ended up purchasing completely new flights with EVA which was $2800 compared to the $2500 round trip with Air China! It's now 7/25 and I've been on the phone with Chase for almost 4.5 hours because the supervisor is trying to get Air China to give us a refund. Rather than admitting their fault and giving us the credit owed, they are trying to contest it.  We, the passengers, mean nothing to them.	0
I'm writing this on behalf of my mom and dad, who had a trip booked to Vancouver from Las Vegas. Unfortunately, a month before the trip date, they weren't able to fly anymore due to my mother's stage 4 cancer diagnosis. There was no compensation given for the canceled flight. Not a credit.	0
Toronto to Phoenix. 8:55 a.m. departure on AC 1836. 90 Minute delay originally posted. Then we get on plane actually go through de-icing and then we are told the lavatories don't work and we need maintenance. Back to the terminal. Then we are told we all have the right to deplane after ages on the tarmac. Final announcement is that we all need to deplane as the pilots have gone over time. We get off plane and are only told the plane will leave at 2 p.m. (originally an 8:55 a.m. flight). We were told our tickets served as vouchers for food. This actually worked, but in the end we are delayed 6.5 hours headed to a long weekend getaway in Phoenix - lost a complete day at resort but resort still wants its daily fee. We are offered nothing else yet the Passengers Bill of Rights should allow some compensation for delays over 5 hours that are the fault of the airline.	0
Moscow to Yuzhno Sakhalinsk. On check in at Moscow the staff were rude and refused to check me in as one of my bags as it weighed 24kg instead of 23kg, even though my 2nd check in luggage weighed 12kg. They told me to take 1kg out or pay 2000rur or they wouldnt let me fly. Out of the 46kg I was entitled to take I only had 36kg and ended up having to take 1kg out of my luggage and hand carry it onboard. There was only 1 person scanning boarding passes for economy passengers with no help and no proper queue so all customers were just pushing to get to the desk to board. This was highly unorganised and not pleasant. We had to board on a bus even though we were flying on a full B777 while smaller A320's and B737's sat at the gate making the boarding process very uncomfortable . The plane was one of Aeroflot's oldest B777's. The USB charger was broken at my seat and one of the toilets was out of order. They hadn't changed the entertainment from April to May even though they provided the May entertainment guide. The food was terrible and they ran out of the food selection I wanted due to the way they were serving food (back to front rows). For breakfast I got a buckwheat porridge however it wasnt a porridge at all, just a tray full of cooked but dry buckwheat. They don't serve any alcohol on an 8hr flight - if you want some you have to pay for it and if you want a snack you also have to pay for it. Overall Aeroflot provided poor ground and air service and used an old plane for a long flight. I have flown Aeroflot before and sometimes they can be ok, but on this particular case they were poor.	0
London to Mexico City. Booking Cancelled by the airline without notice to the customer. The original booking was modified at the airport counter for an earlier flight. The airline representative sold a new ticket instead of modifying the existing booking. When attempting to check-in for the return flight, it was noticed a message of "contact the airline", The booking was cancelled for not "taking the existing reservation" which it was not modified by the same airline. A new ticket was sold for $1,700 to be able to fly on the same route, which it was paid due to the urgency to return to the UK. In addition. Our luggage was requested to be dropped off at every airport we had a connection. Aeromexico made our trip as inconvenient as possible. First time using the airline. Never again. So Disappointed.	0
Mexico City to New York JFK. The flight attendants on AeroMexico are really rude. When they should be working, they are actually watching movies (see photo). They wake you up by poking you in the leg when you are sleeping to move you to another seat so that they can sit in the seat you're in, to watch movies. How can you be watching movies when you are supposed to be working? The plane is very cold and I got sick from the flight. No refreshments offered. I wrote to complain about this, and nothing was done. In fact, they told me they were going to close my case without doing anything about my complaint. I will not fly AeroMexico again. If I could rate zero stars, I would.	0
Mexico City to Madrid. The treatment that this company gives to their clients is obnoxious.  Lied repeatedly over some delays from saying that the plane was there and 20 minutes later was not at all, saying that the plane was in maintenance and that would be in 1h 30min ready and then there was no plane (again). Changed 3 times to different gateways. All this from midnight to 8. Did not offer any hotel, just after 5am when you cannot check in anyway. I will not even continue but this went on for a while. Worst ever.	0
Santorini to London  via Athens. When my sister and I checked in for the Santorini to Athens flights we had two rollerbags which were labeled cabin baggage on check in by Aegean. (A355 3 June) On our continuing flight to London (A3602 3 June), the gate agent stopped us and demanded that we pay 60 euros for one of our carryons despite the fact they were tagged by Aegean on our previous connecting flight. He would not let us on the plane unless we paid him. We finally paid to not hold up other travelers but in the confusion of this my purse was left on his counter. (not the main check in counter but the one to the side of the door where he collected the money). Immediately upon getting to my seat I noticed the purse missing. I asked the three stewardesses at the front of the plane if I could retrieve my purse at that counter. The man charging us the baggage fee at the last minute could also have run the purse down, and didn't. I could not leave the plane to go up the ramp but they did not offer for one of them to get it for me and instead waited for a young baggage boy to go see it it was there. What could have been accomplished in 5 minutes took at least 15 or more. He came back and said he did not see it. Literally, it was only 5 minutes from the time we got to our seat to when I could have had a stewardess check the countertop. The attendants could have called the gate but didn't or one of them gone to that counter, but they did not. On arrival at Heathrow, the departure agent called Athens for me and the purse was at lost and found with greek police at airport. They had it at the ticket check in stand after all! They gave me the reference number of 2294 and said to call DHL (maybe UPS) to have it couriered to me. I am not a business and have no way of putting the purse (small fabric dark grey shoulder bag 10 x 12") in a box with a label which was suggested for pickup. Aegean Air, when contacted, said I would have to go through Greek lost and found and could offer no further assistance. I will pay if needed for it to be sent. I obviously am not in Athens and do not know anyone to pick the purse up for me there. The ticket agent in London was helpful but all of the numbers I have tried to reach since then either don't respond or give me another number that doesn't respond. He also said we should not have been charged the 60 euros at the last minute on the continuing flight. After calls and emails the airline finally did say they would credit the charge. It now has taken me five days and numerous long distance calls to get my purse returned. Hopefully this coming week UPS in conjunction with an exceptionally helpful lady in lost and found may be able to return my purse.	0
Milano to Chania via Athens. I received an email from Aegean for upgrade (but I did not notice that the upgrade was only for the flight Milano-Athens). My offer (80 euros) was accepted.  For the flight I had two handbags of 3.5 and 7.5 kg as permitted for Business class (less than the 5 and 8 kg allowance for each handbag). It was only in Athens that I was asked to pay for one of these handbags (Athens-Chania was still economy and only one luggage is permitted) either 60 euros in the gate (with a fine) or to run to check-in 124 of Aegean to pay 25 euros. I had to pay for a handbag of 7.5kg 25 euros. If they had informed me in Milano when I checked in my luggage that I would have to pay for the one handbag in Athens, I would have put the content of small handbag in one of my luggage, since there was space in my baggage. The use of the lounge of Aegean in Athens was not permitted. I wrote to Aegean and customer relations department of Aegean who replied and stated twice only that the flight Athens to Chania was economy.  As for the space in the business class. If you get the seats 1A or 1 C is fine. I was in 1F and the space was not something that is worth the money. Also, in row 2 the seats seems to be like the space in the seats+ (why pay for business class?). The folded tables that are opened from the arm of the chair are not convenient.	0
I flew Berlin to Tel Aviv overnight. There was not enough pillows or blankets for everyone. My seat in row 13 would not recline backwards - even though the seats behind had extra space (35 euro extra), and the pitch of the seat made it impossible to get comfortable. The snack was a joke -  chocolate or a packet of crisps. It was obvious they where only concerned in increasing revenue by pushing people to buy overpriced food. Its the last time I will fly Air Berlin.	0
Flew Air Berlin for the first time last week. From the start of online booking I began to have serious doubts; poor user interface, deceptive pricing and more. The airfares initially shown are not comparable to competing airlines because of Air Berlin a la carte pricing. A rule of thumb would be to add at least €70/person when flying within Europe to make a realistic comparison.  Amazingly, the staff made the determination of overweight baggage by lifting my hand carry themselves. An airline can't extract more junk fees based on their subjective impression of weight. They must have a certified scale! Onboard after a chaotic boarding the seats appeared to be very cramped but cabin service was efficient.	0
This airline treated us very bad. My flight was from Mumbai to Beijing to Montréal. But my Mumbai to Beijing got delayed and I missed my flight to Montréal and then they told us that they will arrange a flight but we have to get our bags from I don't know where which was too far from the gates and we ended up missing the flight. After that when we got our bags they gave us the flight to Vancouver and then to Montréal. Literally I had spent 100$ to upgrade to premium economy and 1025 rupees to get a window seat and they gave us the middle seat and it was so horrible that I would not suggest anyone to travel by it. Instead go buy a more expensive ticket and get a comfortable seat.	0
Return flights from London to Bangkok via Beijing booked with Air China seemed a good price deal, but you get what you pay for! Bag delayed on outward journey and airline ‘insisted’ it had to be delivered to my hotel at 3am off a following flight meaning the hotel owner had to get up to receive it, despite being told later on would be more acceptable. In flight ‘entertainment’ was laughable, I’ve never seen such an antiquated system, a total waste of time and definite breach of the word entertainment. Return flight Beijing to London departed around 7am, an 11 hour flight. Weather was clear and sunny, again the above ‘entertainment’ system which resulted in looking out of the window at the views below to pass the time, or should I say ‘trying to’, was repeatedly asked by cabin crew to close my blind, when I asked why (thinking maybe we were flying over a restricted area etc) I was told people were trying to sleep - apparently Air China think it is ok for passengers not sleeping on a long haul day flight to sit in a completely dark cabin for 11 hrs with no in flight entertainment and a low phone battery staring at the back of the headrest in front?! If you like either chicken/rice or shrimp/noodles you’ll be fine for food, otherwise enjoy the bread rolls I saw being offered as alternatives 5 Next time stick with Thai Airways.	0
We were flying back from Orlando to Toronto, originally boarding time 4:10pm and scheduled to land before 8pm. We received multiple notifications about flight delays, each time saying it will be delayed approximately 1 hour. notifications kept coming as we waited with uncertainty, until finally it states plane would arrive at approx. 1:15am. At one point, after 11pm, it seemed like they were trying to genuinely expedite things for us, saying flight will arrive in 30 minutes and do quick turn around. 30 minutes later, another delay saying have to wait for 2 flight attendants to come in, 30 minutes away. another 30 minutes later, they said they are waiting for another attendant to come in, about 30 minutes away! Feels like just making excuses and in the end, boarding time remained unchanged at 1:15 approx. We were not offered any vouchers for meals. Once plane arrived, gate attendant did not show any sympathy regarding the passengers' frustration, but rather demanded and threatened that attendants be treated respectfully and politely, otherwise would turn plane around and none of the passengers will board. Gate attendant was rude, ignoring our questions and requests. If people are not completely frustrated by now, then I can't think of a better way to agitate everyone. Finally arrived back at Toronto around 4:30. after picking up luggages and passing customs, arrived home at 5:30. Unfortunately, had to go to work exhausted. Overall, extremely bad experience.	0
We flew with Aeromexico from Amsterdam to Mexico City and return. On both flights the staff was very unpolite. In particular the treatment of passengers by female flight crew members is rude and without any service attitude that you would even find in cheap European airlines. Multiple times the flight crew was bumping against the edge seats. Food was dashed off on the table without a word. When asked if a meat or vegatarian dish was available, the answer was "no, thats out already" and walking away, rather than "no sorry, but may I offer . instead". Coffee/tea was offered by shouting through the cabin "coffee? tea??" rather than asking "would you like a coffee?". I witnessed that behaviour with all passengers around us likewise. I have never seen such unpolite and rude behaviour in any other European, American or Asian airline carrier. On top of all of that, the return flight was delayed by 1.5 hrs so that we missed our connecting flight, resulting in a 5 hrs. delay of arrival at our final destination. The answer of Aeromexico whether they can offer a compensation was: "we can offer a sincere apology". Finally, the flight was not even expensive, but above average for that route. All in all, I will never travel with Aeromexico again, but will rather resort to well established European or Asian carriers.	0
AeroMexico from Mexico City to Amsterdam. As Ticket package i booked the "Classic Package", which included selecting a seat and luggage up to 23KG included (this package is ~70US$ more expensive, than the basic fare without luggage and seat reservation one-way!). I did the online-checkin-process, which went very smooth and chose my seat. One hour before departure i checked again in the customer-page, if everything was fine - it was and my seat was still blocked for me and the whole row (two more seats free). Until here everything was perfect. But then the boarding started.  My digital boarding pass on my smartphone was rejected several times, so the ground-stuff-guy went with me to the counter and gave me a printed boarding pass with another seat. I asked why they changed my seat without further announcement or communication to me, as passenger? After all i paid additional money, to choose my seat, but now the ground staff changed my seat. He just said, i shouldn't be so excited, it is exactly the same place, just in another part of the airplane. I again started discussing with him, that this behaviour is wrong, changing the booked and additionally paid seats of the customers - but he just turned around and went away. Consequently i ended on the seat directly in front of the toilets, where the seat recline was much less, than on my booked seat - sleeping was a torture for this overnight-connection. My original booked seat got a woman with a kid of about 12 years, they blocked obviously the three seats and laid flat down all the way to Amsterdam. But it is unbelievable, that people, who paid additional money for reserving a seat are removed and moved to another seat, while others, who didn't pay and reserve their seat before, get benefits for free. They could have gotten those seats, but then they needed to pay also additional money for getting this comfort. The stewardess in the airplane was completely incompetent. I showed her the two boarding-passes and she just said in a rude way, that my digital boarding pass is invalid and now i need to move. No offer for an upgrade to the premium-economy or business for this impudence. So, reserving seats against money is in AeroMexico no good option, you anyway have no guarantee to get your reserved and booked seat. I will try to avoid them from now on, even if I flew already a few times with them.	0
Cancun to Vancouver via Mexico City. Aeromexico boarding service was the worst I had experienced. A representative at the gate refused to board our entire family of 5 people (including 6 yrs old daughter) because we passed on to him all 5 passports and boarding passes in one pile (like we usually do everywhere else in the World). Instead he wanted us to enclose each boarding pass into the corresponding passport. It took us about 20 seconds to do so. However the representative tried to send us back to the end of the line. Moreover while discussing he detached an immigration/visitors form from my son's boarding pass (we all have seen him doing so) and few minutes later he claimed we didn't submit the form and he has a right to cancel our flight. To my request to call for his manager and solve the problem hi simply replied 'I'm going to call for a police. It's not your country, you'd better follow my instructions' We found that statement offensive and inappropriate for international airline representative. For our future trips we are not going to consider Aeromexico service any more.	0
Athens to Vienna. Really unhelpful staff. The app is confusing and it left out my name down twice for the two tickets I purchased. Went to check in and realised this so called and was told I’d get my money back but instead they charged me double the price I paid for the ticket and said they were doing me a favour!	0
Los Angeles to Dublin. The planes was old and appeared tired and worn out. The service was minimal similar to a low cost airline. I had to buy wine or beer to have with my meal. Breakfast was bistro bun in a box. There was little interaction from cabin staff. The entertainment system had a limited choice of old movies. It was a sad reflection of Ireland national airline.	0
Dublin to Amsterdam via Belfast. I overbooked hold luggage for a flight in January 2020 Dublin to Amsterdam. I tried to cancel one of the hold bags and get a refund as we wont need anywhere near the load I bought. Can you do this? No chance! There is no facility on their website to do this. We haven't even flown yet.	0
Madrid to Chicago via Dublin. I came to Chicago for a very important meeting for the Thanksgiving weekend and my luggage was delayed. The meeting took place in Gainesville, GA. I had to leave Chicago the next day, November 27th, 2019. Due to the fact that my luggage was delayed I had to buy new clothing and all the necessary items needed that were in my luggage. This was a big inconvenience for me since the meeting I attended was 4 days long. I had to buy 6 extra outfits on top of toiletries. The luggage arrived at the airport 2 days later. At that time I was already in Gainesville, GA. The delivery company had called me while I was in the meeting. I got out of the meeting and I spent 20 minutes on the phone trying to find one of the host's neighbors to receive the luggage at 10PM. This, as well, was a big inconvenience. I asked for a different timing for the next day, but I was denied. When I called the claims department to make a complaint about this incident I was told I should have called earlier. I came from Spain to Chicago for a meeting that took place in GA. My schedule was very tight. I called the claims department as soon as I was available to call. At this point I am very disappointed how everything was handled. A luggage has to be with the passenger at all times. I understand that the luggage arrived 2 days later, but it was too late for me. I was out of town already without clothes and other necessities. The meeting was the highlight of my trip. The host's neighbor wakes up early. They can't be staying up to receive my luggage because the delivery company didn't want to accommodate the delivery for the next day. The neighbor wasn’t obligated to do this for me and if he hadn’t done it, the luggage could have been waited outside for a while. The agent from the Central Baggage Services has told me that I should have called earlier. I haven't traveled to the US to spend all my time on the phone, and I had to use the host's phone being in a different country. I travel every year and I used airplanes before, but this was one of the worst experiences I had! During the flight I didn’t receive food as promised. I wasn’t speaking English, so nobody stopped by to ask me if I was hungry or not. Nobody from the personnel was speaking Spanish. How shameful! I asked for a refund and they tell me they can't give me a refund because they didn't sell the ticket directly with me. They expect the agency where I bought the ticket from to give me a refund. The agency didn't do anything wrong. They just sold a ticket. What should they give me the refund?	0
I booked flight for my parents from Delhi to Vancouver via Beijing. I prebooked my father's wheelchair (he can not walk or stand for longer because of permanent leg injury) and their meals AVML since they are pure vegetarian. It was connecting flight through Beijing. All was going well until they reached Beijing. The wheelchair assist guy took advantage of their age and language barrier. He took them to gate no 32. He then asked for money. My parents told him that they couldn't understand, so he wrote on a paper in English that he wants money to take them to gate. They Didn't know what was happening, after trying to understand him they gave him 400 INR. He asked for more, my parents were not carrying more cash in their hand baggage so they denied outcome of which he left them at gate no 32 and went away saying something in Chinese which they clearly don't understand. They waited there for 2 hours and then my mother decided to go for a walk around and look for the gate number for their next flight because they eventually figured it out that they are stranded on wrong gate. She found a few Indians sitting near gate number 19 who guided her and told her that they are supposed to reach gate number 16 which was really not anywhere near gate number 32. She rushed back to my father and told him the scenario. They couldn't find any other ground staff near by who could understand them so she decided to take my father on a wheelchair by her own along with the 2 hand bags they were carrying. They made it till gate number 20 when someone showed up to help after maybe observing them struggling. The nightmare didn't end there, after taking off for next flight, they were offered Fish to eat. They told the crew that they are vegetarian (I booked AVML which is reflected on their tickets too) and can't eat fish. The crew told them that since there is no vegetarian option available, they have to either eat it or wait for landing to eat in Vancouver. They didn't eat for 12+ hours of flight.  I have read about people sharing their experience but never imagined that something like this could happen to my family. How does some big airlines do such kind of money business without having feelings for their passengers?	0
Ottawa to Tampa. Absolutely the worst experience flying with any airline. Seats so tight together that my sore arthritic knees were forced up against the seat in front of me. The tray table if I had been able to use it would have hit me in the chest. I have been flying since I was 5 years old and so I have 55 years experience when I say that flying has never been so uncomfortable. Top this off with the rudeness we were met with everywhere we turned, especially at check in at the Air Canada counter in Ottawa. Rude, impatient and dismissive treatment. It was truly a horrible experience. Because of the lack of space it was very warm and made us feel claustrophobic. The passengers on the flight kept getting out of their seats as a result. My husband was hit by the cart each time it went by. We are people not cattle.	0
Toronto to Bogota. Do you like waiting on a stationary plane for hours and hours? Are you allergic to water, food, and other simple luxuries? Do you hate getting to a hotel that you've already paid for the day after you were supposed to? If you answered yes to these questions, then boy, do I have an airline for you!	0
Toronto to West Palm Beach. I have flown AC for a few weeks now and noticed they have no on-time arrival statistics because they are continually late. There are tremendous inefficiencies at the gate and on boarding crew, they are not helpful at all. They smile and speak two languages but that does not assist passengers trying to figure out where to put their luggage when there is no room left. Their website is difficult to navigate and the link to Aeroplan is less than stellar. They also are not very accommodating making sure folks stay hydrated in the air. Trying to call or electronically communicate forget it, no answer. Unfortunately, the price of the tickets is no different than any other airline. It does show when there are no regulations and big corporations like Air Canada can do what they want and treat their customers any way they choose. Sometimes a little regulation goes a long way. There are no watchdogs on this airline!	0
Toronto to Belize, delayed by 48 minutes. The flight attendants were rude to me. We were told to get our own alcoholic beverages from the back of the plane when asking for a refill. On our second flight there was no beer on a 5hour flight. Our 4 flights with Air Canada during our vacation was delayed or rescheduled. The airline overbooks flights and then asks people to wait until the next day to fly out.	0
Almost all the AC staff were subpar in their customer service treatment. I remember asking for a tissue on the way back as I was quite sick and the air hostess said she would help after serving the food. So I waited and nothing. I didn't bother reminding her again. I used the restroom. Later on during the flight I had a question and pressed the button and nothing. I understand staff get busy and that's no problem. However, I pressed that button over 5 times throughout the flight and not a single host came to address my inquiry. From the moment we tried to board until the very end, there wasn't a single rep I could give a shout out to. The attitude was aggressive and arrogant. A little mindfulness goes a long way and the staff in my opinion need to significantly up their game. The job isn't merely to serve food on the plane but to make sure all travellers are respected and responded to with basic kindness.  Of course this is just my one such experience there may have been others out there who've had a pleasant experience with this airline.	0
Ho Chi Minh to Tel Aviv via Moscow. I ordered a special meal and on the first flight I got my meal but on the connection I was told that the meal was only booked for the first leg of the flight, which was obviously a mistake by the airline. When I landed I spoke to Aeroflot again to make sure that on the return flight everything is registered correctly and that I am registered to have a special meal, they assured me that they would verify this. 1 day before the flight I called to speak to them again and the woman I spoke to was rude, said I had not ordered a kosher meal and that they cannot fix it even though they have much time until the flight, which I will take tomorrow.	0
Vancouver to Merida via Mexico City. Worst experience ever. Worst airline ever. Worst customer service ever. I had to rearrange my return flight with a different low-cost airline and the experience was way better. I have never felt so disregarded by an airline before in my life, they didn't show the slightest intention to help me at any time. I guess they just don't care about average people, just hi-end business travellers. I'll never use Aeromexico again, not even if they give me the tickets for free.	0
Mexico City to Salt Lake City. This is easily the worst airline experience I've ever had. I had a problem with my departure date and needed to switch it for another day, and not only did they not help me switch it but said it would be impossible to change my flight and refused to give me any kind of refund. I will never use this airline again.	0
Leeds to Boston via Dublin. Due to weather, other airlines made changes to itineraries but Aer Lingus published the flight as being on time. They never provided any updates and said there was no one available to help. The display boards in the Leeds airport said “update at 12:00” then “update at 12:30” then “update at 12:50” then finally after 1:00 the boards displayed “report to gate #“ We reported to the specified gate number to find complete confusion. After standing there for some time with no information, someone from Aer Lingus appeared and said we were being put on a bus to the Manchester airport. It took some time to get everyone loaded onto the bus then the same Aer Lingus person came to the front of the bus and made an announcement. The Aer Lingus person told us an airplane was waiting at the Manchester airport to take us to Dublin and said an Aer Lingus person would meet us at the bus upon arrival in Manchester and escort us. She also asked us to each call Aer Lingus at +353 1 761 7844 to get re-booked on the Dublin to Boston part of the trip. She added that if we couldn’t fly on to Dublin on Sunday that we would be put up in a hotel. It took about 80 minutes for an Aer Lingus representative to answer. A man finally came on the line and said he had no idea what I was talking about and he said he was sitting in New York and wasn’t sure how he could help. He did confirm that there was no way an airplane was waiting for us in Manchester and he finally booked us on a Dublin to Boston flight for Monday. We arrived in Manchester after a long bus ride to a complete customer service disaster. There was no one there to meet us as we got off the bus to escort us as promised. We weren’t sure what to do so we made our way to the Aer Lingus desk where they didn’t have a clue what was going on. They told us to use our original Aer Lingus boarding passes to get through security obviously, after trying several times we realized that was impossible. We had to go back to the Aer Lingus desk and after another long wait, we were finally booked from Manchester to Dublin. When we arrived in Dublin, there was no one there to help us as promised. After a number of inquiries, we were told there’s an Aer Lingus customer service desk in the baggage claim area. We made our way to the Aer Lingus desk and again no one knew what we were talking about and no one had a clue how to help us, even though we were told this had all been sorted out. An Aer Lingus man didn’t know what to do so he called the Carlton Hotel and over the phone arranged for us to spend the night there. We took the shuttle and arrived at the hotel for the night. This ordeal took 14 hours with Aer Lingus lying multiple times along the way - totally unacceptable customer service, not to mention lost wages and the extreme anxiety their lies caused.	0
Seattle to Birmingham via Dublin . I booked a three-segment flight to Birmingham, UK, following the route SLC to SEA, SEA to DUB, DUB to BHX. The first segment was an Alaskan Airlines codeshare. I go to the Alaska Airlines counter at Salt Lake and check-in, as I could not check-in online due to the international segments. They check my luggage through to Birmingham, and tell me to print off my Aer Lingus boarding passes in Seattle. No big deal, I think. That's not an uncommon issue with codeshares. I land at Seattle, 6 hours in advance of my next flight's departure. I exit security and make my way to the Aer Lingus ticket counter. Which, as it turns out, isn't staffed. No problem! I think (foolishly). I'll just check in at a kiosk. Oddly enough, kiosk returns "Flight is not open for check-in." Okay, fine I go to check-in online. But my record locator isn't working, so I call customer service. I inform them I can't print my boarding passes. They give me a record locator and tell me to try checking in online. I try, and the "Reprint boarding passes" button is greyed out. Let's try the mobile app - nope, "No issuing boarding passes" error is returned. I call customer service again. Unapologetically, they tell me to just wait until they start staffing their single ticket counter at Seattle. They also tell me to try calling my travel agency (AmEx Global Travel, in this case, who I'd booked through). I call AmEx. They apologetically explain that they don't even have an agency dial-in to Aer Lingus they can call Aer Lingus but will get the same runaround as I did. The AmEx agents are always good people. Fine. I decide to chat with an Alaskan rep, who is friendly and tells me "Yeah, Aer Lingus has a tendency to annoy a lot of travelers with their customer service approach." This is 2019. "Printing boarding passes" is sort of a fundamental thing. The second rep I talked to on the phone told me "We're going paperless," which would be great if literally any of their IT toolkits worked properly. The agents didn't know when the kiosks would be available for check-in. Nor could agents release the flight for me to check in again, or authorize re-fetching my boarding passes, or email them to me, or send them via SMS, or authorize their access with their mobile app. If you look at Google Reviews, you'll see that Aer Lingus has a well-deserved 1.2 stars out of 5 at SEATAC. I won't fly Aer Lingus again. Basic customer service can't and shouldn't really be ignored - due to them, I spent 3 hours sitting outside the security zone at SEATAC because none of their agents were either trained or had permission to actually distribute boarding passes. This is senseless, and moreover *easily corrected.* This is not complex work, and not something any other transatlantic carrier operating in North America has issues with. 0/10. Failures happen. I'm not going to judge an airline by its errors, but by how it attempts to remedy them, which in this case, appears to be a determined course of calculated indifference.	0
Toronto to Honolulu. I was threatened of cancellation 3 times and had to re-purchase my ticket each time thanks to some flawed algorithm the airline uses. I received emails stating that it was potentially a fraudulent purchase, and I needed to come to the airline in person to show ID, otherwise, I would be cancelled within 48 hours prior to travel. I was not refunded any money either, just informed of this. Because I was traveling with a young child and a party of 4 others, I had no choice (otherwise I'd have bought another ticket with a different airline). I drove 2 hours out of my way in order to do this, and when I got to the airport the Air Canada representative told me I had to repurchase the tickets. I told him I was not refunded, and he insisted that "the money was on its way." This was 3 weeks ago, so essentially I paid double for my tickets and had to drive way out of my way in inclement weather to do so. This is the worst airline ever - unethical, irresponsible, and fraudulent.	0
The comments about this airline mostly relate to their international flights and I understand that they offer a good service there. It's a different story on their internal and regional flights. I booked on-line for the short hop return from Bishkek to Almaty. It seemed like a good idea at the time but proved to be a disaster. The airline changed their schedule without informing me their records apparently said that they had "tried to contact me" - I'm not even sure how. I turned up at the airport and waited for 5 hours assuming that it had simply been delayed for that time only to find out that they had moved me not to that flight but to one 20 hours earlier. The Air Astana agent acted as though he hadn't seen an e-ticket before claimed I hadn't paid for the outward journey or maybe hadn't paid at all - really any excuse to not allow me onto the plane. I had no alternative but to go back to Bishkek and travel overland the next day - all at my own expense of course. The return flight had been similarly moved but a local agent helped me out to properly arrange that one and got a refund for the outward journey. I complained to Air Astana as my non-arrival had seriously thrown out the plans of my hosts in Almaty not just mine. No answer. I complained again only to receive a fob off reply that they regretted this but they weren't going to do anything further about it and hoped that I would fly with them again: I doubt that very much. I've given 1 rather than 0 as the Almaty to Bishkek "return" flight itself wasn't bad. Their ground service and support in these regional centres very much needs to upgraded to the same standard as their flight experience.	0
Aeromexico is, quite simply, as a flagship carrier, a downright embarrassment. Customer service is nil. The product is more like a low cost airline at best. To be avoided if you can.	0
Cancun to Austin via Mexico City. Awful customer service and corrupt policies. I was told my round trip flight would not be cancelled even though I missed my departure flight. So I got a one way ticket to my destination and expected to use the return flight. No, they cancelled my trip. I will not recommend this to anyone nor use it in the future.	0
Athens to Paris. Quite rude security check after passport control when boarding starts. One manager asked to take my passport without any greeting and was looking at me for 20 seconds and then just got back my passport without saying a word. It was a feeling like I’m a second class citizen maybe because I have Russian passport.	0
Toronto to London via Dublin. Tried to change my ticket the morning before my flight (added an extra 3 hours of layover). I managed to change it back thankfully. Delayed on the runway for an hour in Dublin, lost my checked bags. Customer service was useless, I had to call in 2 or 3 times a day until my bags were returned to have them fix the descriptions of the missing bags (completely lacked any form of common sense - listed all my bags as golf bag at one point?). Finally delivered all my bags three days later, and broke my expensive hiking backpack. I submitted my receipts a month ago and I have heard nothing from customer service about my reimbursement for interim expenses & backpack repairs (have ignored four emails now, I've only been able to make one phone call due to the time difference & international calling fees) Losing all my luggage & struggling with customer service to get it back completely ruined my trip. With so much of my gear & hiking bag missing, I wasn't able to do most of the excursions I had planned, and had to spend a good deal of time waiting around for my bags to be delivered. I understand that everyone is human, and mistakes happen during busy travel seasons, but this is over the top.  I asked for the fee I paid to check my bag back (as well as reimbursement for the perishable goods that expired while my bags were missing), and they declined that as well as any other remedial gesture for their lack of competency. I went with Aer Lingus because the ticket was a little less expensive, and I don't mind a layover, but I know to never fly with this airline. It's not worth the $50 saved. Total mess.	0
Flights with Air Berlin can be like night and day. Flights from JFK to KRK via Berlin/TXL were pleasantly uneventful; ie. decent food and friendly service. Flight back to JFK from TXL was the voyage of the damned. Check-in at WAW took forever, and as TXL has no airside transfer facilities, had to check-in again in Berlin, though I hadn't needed to do that on the outbound flight. The food was inedible on the TXL to JFK leg. They seemed to have forgotten to restock the inflight duty-free, so practically nothing was available. FAs went out of their way to be nasty - every time I wanted a drink I had to ask 3-4 times before finally getting one; a nearby passenger who asked for a whiskey got the phrase "I only have coke" barked at him as the FA walked by never to return. 	0
I took my flight from New York to Bombay via Beijing. First the flight got delayed for 1.5 hour at JFK airport then it got delayed at Beijing airport for another 4 hours, when plane was on runway at Beijing airport the it stopped there and took a halt for 2 hours and they stated the reason that there is no fuel in the plane. This is very negligent on a part of international airline that they didn't check for fuel when waited for 2-3 hours, its like keeping the life of customer at risk. When I reached Mumbai Airport, I didn't got my baggage there and airline employee informed me that my baggage is at Beijing airport, they forgot to transfer my bag to the connecting flight. I got my bags after 4 days at my home with items missing from my bag. Air China's customer service is very bad and they take no responsibility for their customer's safety and product security. I have contacted them several time but got no proper response, it is very irresponsible behavior.  Air China is taking no responsibility to help me find my items or compensate me for the loss. Even during flight when I asked for water, they told me they are out of disposal glass which is very bad on part of service the airline is providing. Worst service for safety and security.	0
Shanghai to Jakarta via Beijing. This is the worst flight ever!  I have a bad stop over condition with 1.5hrs time ti change the flight from domestic flight to international flight. It is a combination of huge airport not clear signage short time to change the plane and so tight security checking made me arrive in the gate 10 mins prior to departing. Which i didnt found any ground officer there was one lady inside the isle and notice with my appearance but apparently she didnt open the glass gate for me. I contacted one of friend who were able to enter the plane in order to inform the staff to let me in without any result. The process to get to international counter wasnt easy as well. I have to ask several times till finally arrived to the counter which located in domestic terminal. No solution given and the lady was insisted of saying the airlines was able to replace my ticket with same same route for another two days because Air China doesnt have daily flight to Jakarta. It was suck!! Since air china wasnt able to compensate me with the accomodation since i have to stay for another two days cant refund my ticket cant give me rerouting ticket cant give me another ticket from its affiliates and i have to book another ticket myself if i want to catch up the earliest flight to my country. The staff also didnt communicate well because apparently my baggage was being taken out from the plane. Later i found out from my friend that the flight got delayed for more than one hour for the sake of taking out my luggage. Still dont understand why Air China sells ticket with short time for stopover if the condition is not supported. Later I read in Beijing capital terminal mentioned that at min should have 2 hours stop over to process with all those checkins and moving from one to other terminals.	0
I have flown this segment (TOR-Victoria) a number of times. I used to commute Toronto to London, UK and typically paid less for that flight segment (even buying less than a week’s notice). This Rouge plane isn’t fit for purpose: seats are falling apart, no legroom, no food (5 hour flight?), no screens, we bus out to the tarmac from AC’s hub at Pearson, the plane never leaves on time - the entire experience is borderline - criminal. I’d love to see ACs CEO saddle up for this experience in economy. The least he could do is put a proper plane/gate on the route.	0
Toronto to Barcelona. Purchasing the tickets was a complete nightmare. The website kept getting errors and I could not book the dates I wanted. Customer service helped me over the phone advised they apologized and because of the Mishap they would place me in a better seat free of charge with extra legroom. I am in the plane right now. If your guessing I don't have extra legroom you're right. I also never ended up getting the dates I wanted because the representative kept getting the same error as I got initially. Fast forward to the airport. Get on the plane,  no entertainment.  Pay for Wi-Fi or use their App is the entertainment. I went online, took out my gift card, and it turns out they don't accept their own gift card. Whatever, I pay. They bring the food that is included. It's not good at all.  I wait for someone to come to ask if I want anything else. No one for about and hour and a half. So I press the service button on the elbow rest. No one came for another roughly 20 minutes. I get up and walk all to the back of plane and ask for Their meal combo. Turns out they don't have combos on international flight.  They don't have any additional food on this flight except for chips. I buy anyway, because there's another 5 hours left and I have a gift card... but they don't accept their own gift cards for food either. So it's basically useless now with the remaining balance.... How am I going to spend 120 remaining on a gift card if I can only use it for plane tickets? I only have 6 months to use it or lose it.	0
Flew London Heathrow to Beijing via Moscow. My only reason to write this review is to warn other Skyteam members not to fly with Aeroflot. From booking to flight, aside from the planes being relatively new and a lower price than the poor standard Chinese airlines there is no other reason to fly with them. Despite being a Platinum member I was unable to book any economy comfort seats nor even an exit seat, they are all blocked for Aeroflot members only - and on the London to Moscow leg all the exit seats were empty and we were not allowed to move to them. On the 9.5 hour Beijing leg there are no extra legroom seats as they are only available on the 777's, so you are on an aircraft that most airlines use on medium haul with only 30 inches legroom - the cabin was crammed with people all over the place and as normal rather large people at that with legs in the aisles. Check-in was supposed to start at 7.40 but we waited until 8am whilst listening to the staff stories about the night before whilst they drank their coffee, the start of abysmal service displayed throughout the entire journey. Flight left 1 hour late and then at Moscow was delayed again by 1.15 whilst they de-iced the wings. The food was not only poor it was inedible, and I had the same AVML meal on both legs plus no alcohol at all, and when questioned all I got was a curt "we never have any" reply. Why on earth not? There is no religious reason on flights to China and even China Eastern has 2 bottles of red and white. Lounges were typical Eastern European, absolutely packed and with no hot food whatsoever, I managed to find some coleslaw and sweet bread plus some Chilean wine to keep me going as I'd eaten nothing for over 6 hours. Entertainment system was zero on the flight from London, not even a communal TV nor any music, and on the Beijing flight it kept breaking down. At no time did any staff walk around with drinks, there are no snacks available not even noodles and if you press your call button they do not answer. I can only assume that the reason to travel with them is the price, it was a terrible experience from start to finish.	0
Cancun to Mexico City. Wooed by the promise of "more personal space, an exclusive in-flight menu, and preferential treatment", I chose to fly Aeromexico's business class on the popular Cancun-Mexico City route. Things started going downhill at check-in when I was told there was no lounge service, even though my terminal had a contract VIP lounge that could easily have been commissioned by Aeromexico. While it had been a very long time since I had flown business class with an airline that didn't offer a lounge service, I expected the on-board catering - which Aeromexico promised would be "premium hors d'oeuvres, drinks and in-flight menu" - would help make up for the disappointment. How wrong was I? I was appalled to learn that the nice lunch I was reasonably hoping for would consist of nuts and a selection of junk food like chocolate bars and potato crisps. After being completely misled by Aeromexico's advertising, I was left hungry by the time I arrived in Mexico City two and a half hours later and feeling as though I had been taken for a fool. If you're thinking of paying extra for Aeromexico's domestic business class offering, please avoid my mistake and don't bother.	0
As most of you already know, AeroMexico partners with Delta. So, we booked our trip to Mexico through Delta Vacations (that part went perfectly, as usual). We not only booked our flights but we chose to go with Aeromexico on the way back. Partially because it went through Mexico City and we had an overnight stay and it was an airline we had not flown with before. To put things in perspective, we have flown with several other Delta partners in the past and have had zero issues (matter of fact, they were great! KLM, Air France, etc.). So, we thought that this would be the same type of experience and of course a new adventure. We were so incredibly wrong! We booked our flights in mid-June for the beginning of October and our seating assignments and everything were set to go (they were first class seats). Two days before our flight we checked both Aeromexico and Delta and the Delta seating arrangement was correct (nothing had changed) but Aeromexico had moved our seats (on both flights) to the very front of the plane, which we do not like because there is no place to put your hand carry (personal) bags so you have to put them above. Since Aeromexico was for a trip back we were told after spending over an hour on the phone that they would not change our seats until 24 to 48 hours before. This was interesting to us because they had already changed our seating on both flights to the front of the plane (without any warning). From what we understand after speaking with our Delta representative (because Aeromexico was almost impossible to get in touch with) this had been the second change they made to our seating without advising us or even giving us the option to choose. So now sitting in Cancun, Mexico (wasting more of our vacation) 24 to 48 hours before our flight back, we checked Aeromexico. To our great surprise, they had not only moved us again but this time out of first class and into the main cabin, which would be fine if that’s what we had paid for. So again (while on vacation), we get on the phone and waste our time with Aeromexico. Then after no resolution or better said waiting on the phone (eternal hold). We called Delta again, this call took an hour and a half and the Delta Representative was told by Aeromexico (the first time he called) that they would change us to a different flight. Then, after 15 minutes of no changes the Delta representative called back and he was told that not only would they not change our flights but if we wanted our old seats back or a different flight that we would have to pay. Of course, we refused (Who in their right mind would hand over more money?). We asked the Delta representative what his response was to them and he said that he took it to their management and they also refused saying the same thing. What it appeared to us is that Aeromexico was trying to upcharge us for services we already purchased. This should be brought up to the Aeromexico corporate headquarters, and used as training and a teaching tool on how to not treat your customer. Because we fly so much with Delta and because we think they’re just a better airline, the Delta Vacations representative took us off of the Aeromexico flights and found us flights home on Delta (for no additional cost and the same day!). We would not and could not recommend Aeromexico to anyone at any time for anything. Moreover, we are actually shocked that they remain in business with these types of unethical practices and behaviors.	0
Cancun to Havana. I have tried to make contact with this business multiple times over the last month. This airline does not offer phone support other than for very basic assistance like sales. Everything else must be through email. However, my issue is they don't respond to their email. I asked for a tax to be refunded that I was never supposed to be charged as I was exempt from this tax, as well as a refund for a phone booking fee that I was not notified about until after the charge was completed. They responded to me that ¨everyone is notified about the phone charge, and that the tax would not be refunded¨. I replied on August 28th clarifying which tax I was referring to, I also asked them to review the call recording as they would hear that I inquired about the phone fee to be refunded while I was on the phone with the representative. The sales agent did not mention the fee. I inquired with him about the fee after seeing it on the receipt in my email. He told me the only way to receive a refund was to email the complaints department. This was during the sale, not in another interaction. Furthermore, I would have never made a phone reservation but their online booking system was having an issue and the error message told me I needed to call to complete the reservation. For this reason alone they should have refunded me that fee. However, I received no response to this email. I emailed again September 17th, to let them know that I was injured in an accident and would not be able to make the flight. I emailed them a medical certificate, and photos of my injuries, and I requested that they provide either a refund or a credit to be used on a future flight. They couldn't even be bothered to reply with a ¨no¨. Just no response at all. I later realized that my Visa Infinite card that I made the payment on came with trip insurance, so I filed a claim with my insurance company. My insurance company requested a letter from the airline stating that the trip was canceled. The airline did send this. However, after I submitted the letter to my insurance, my insurance company requested that the letter also include additional details. I requested a revision to the letter on September 23rd. However, once again, I received no response. Despite being routinely ignored by this business the only thing I am asking for is a document confirming 1. the cancellation of the flight, 2. the amounts reimbursed and the fines charged OR indicating that there will be no refund. Also, an apology for simply ignoring almost every communication with them would also be nice.	0
On 3rd October Aer Lingus cancelled my flight from Dublin to Verona (I discovered it at the airport since they sent a cancellation email less than 2 hrs before the flight). They said that it was because of the storm Lorenzo but I'm sure it was just an excuse. How is it possible that all the other flights that were going to Milan, Bologna, Venice etc., that are not far away as the cow flies from Verona, departed without any issue and mine didn't? Aer Lingus just didn't want to spend money for a flight with only 40 passengers so they cancelled it and, luckily for them, they also had the perfect excuse that day, the storm. I was supposed to fly out at 12.55 pm and instead I flew to Milan Malpensa at 07.30 pm because also that flight had an hour delay, and in Milan we arrived to Verona airport at 02.30 am by a coach organised by an Aer Lingus representative. After that I had an additional hour to reach my home. I arrived home at 03.30 am after I had been waiting at Dublin airport since 11.00 am of the previous day. A trip that should have lasted maximum 8 hours took actually 17.5 hours and bevause of that I got sick during my holidays and now I'm back at work still sick. I have filled out their form to receive a compensation for this awful experience and they denied it! And in the email they also expect me to book with them again? I hope they are kidding! Their company and their behavior is just disgraceful, I'm never ever going to book with them in my life again.	0
Aer Lingus is a very poorly run airline. They encourage you to book your domestic and international travel through their website and then leave you to the wolves for your domestic travel. I booked a flight for work from Nashville, TN to Shannon, IR. Aer Lingus stated that I would be able to select my domestic travel seats directly with Jetblue. After booking I discovered that I cannot book a seat with Jetblue until 24 hours before the flight since I booked through a 3rd party (as in Aer Lingus). Also learned there were only middle seats left and I was out of luck. When I called Aer Lingus's US reservation center I was greeted by two very rude agents who treated me like I was disturbing their day. They informed me that they were unwilling to do anything to help. When I requested to cancel my domestic travel they said I would loose the entire fare and only get the government fees back. When I asked to talk to a supervisor they told me that were all busy and would call me back, never got the call! I encourage every international traveler to seek any other airline than Aer Lingus. They do not put their customers first and it shows!	0
Budapest to Tokyo via Beijing. Worst service ever. We were 4 hours late to Tokyo and we arrived at midnight, when there are no mass transportation. We had to take a night taxi for a lot of extra charge in order to get to our hotels. The stewardesses are not friendly either except if you're Chinese. And on top of that, our luggage got lost on our way home. I do NOT recommend this airline to anyone. Just save up more money and travel with a better one.	0
London to Phuket via Chengdu. Awful. If you can, book with someone else. All the flights were late, the food is horrible and it did not change in the entire flight (rice and chicken 24/7). But the main thing for me was that on my return, I got the dates wrong and i turned up a day late to my flight. This wad entirely my fault, but no one in the company could offer me a solution and they made me call their call centre in china, where they put me on hold for more than 20min (international call-imagine the cost). The staff was really rude, picked up the phone and said they would not put me in another flight (even though the woman at the check in desk told me there was a lot of space in the next one) and they wanted to charge me around 1000€. In the end I had to book another one with Singapore Airlines, faster and only 550€. Even though it was my fault to miss it, i know this happened to a few people and their company placed them on the next flight free of charge or for a fee.	0
Toronto to Honolulu. Do not use this airline. They cancelled me 3 times, sending me an email saying it had to do with "fraud alert" and that I had to purchase the ticket in person at an Air Canada kiosk, which is 2.5 hours from my home. I repurchased the ticket with another credit card, even though the former was fine and it should have gone through, and 3 days later it happened again. I will never fly with Air Canada rouge again.	0
Toronto to Miami. My wife and I had 1 backpack carry amongst the two of us. We were asked to remove it from overhead storage and put it under our seats. I had shoes and towels stored in the backup making it bulky. I could not sit comfortably throughout the flight. When quizzed as to why other travellers with large and heavy carryons were given first priority - the attendant said that was just the case. It is brutal that we were penalized for choosing to pack lightly. Furthermore, we have seen multiple smaller backups and handbags stored in the same bins. I cannot say why our bag was removed. Atrocious!	0
Toronto to Orlando. I tried to checkin today for my wife and I and found out that they had put us in separate rows even though we booked these tickets 3 months ago. I called and they wouldn’t move us even though there were two emergency seats open. This occurred after they notified us 2 months ago that our flight home was cancelled and we had to choose a different flight. No apologies, no solutions, no customer service, just the arrogance of Air Canada.	0
Stockholm to Los Angeles via Moscow. I had a confirmed ticket but Aeroflot refused to issue me a boarding pass SVO-LAX claiming the information was wrong in their reservation system. Logically they should fix what is wrong on their system. Aeroflot Customer Service "Sorry we can't help you, you will have to buy a new ticket."  Delta was nice enough to fix Aeroflot's dysfunction and get me on the flight. The flight SVO-LAX was delayed for two hours because they were waiting for transit passengers. On a 14 hour flight the IFE did not work for the duration of the flight. They lost my baggage and delivered it 3 days later. Then they kept sending several emails asking question when I claimed reimbursement and to this date I have yet to see a single rouble! I don't mind Aeroflot employees' stony unsmiling demeanor but the lack of service is a dealbreaker.	0
I am very disappointed with Areomexico and this review is based on my last experience with this airline. I had a reservation for my mom, unfortunately she had a medical emergency and needed a gallbladder surgery, when I contacted Aeromexico about this to re-schedule the trip, they told me that I had to pay U$200 dollars to change the date and U$150 because not shown, also that I have to pay the difference in price if there was any because the new dates, we did not have insurance and that is how the company works, the only way they will give the money back is if she would’ve passed away, surgeries and other emergencies are not applicable and you have to pay. I must mention we did not want any money back, just travel date updates. The communication was all over email, there is no way you can talk to anyone from customer service, just people from sales department. Long story short I accepted to pay the U$350 and started looking into new dates and prices on their website, after my research I found out that the new price was U$771.48, this price is from Aeromexico website, so I decided to give call and book / re-schedule the trip with the new dates. At the time of my call the agent confirmed the price I got from their website but after telling them that I was just going to re-schedule and gave him my old reservation number they told me that the prices on their website which is the same price he gave me did not apply to me anymore, the customer service representative said that new tickets prices are different than change of date rates, and I had to pay U$879 for the change of date, U$350 fine and U$529 because the difference in prices, keep in mind on their website a new ticket is U$720 and I originally paid U$1024. Also, I am buying the same destination, same economy seats, same hours, just a different dates and paying the finds and difference in price is there is any, the same agent confirmed that in my case was better to buy a new ticket with the new days than re-scheduling the fly, can you guys believe this? What kind of customer service is this? I won’t recommend this airline anymore it is ridiculous the way the treat their clients. At the end was cheaper to buy a new ticket than changing the dates.	0
I flew on Aegean from Athens to Cairo, a direct flight and when I arrived in Cairo I received a text informing me that my bag did not arrive in Cairo with me. When I checked my bag that morning 2.5 hours before my flight was scheduled to depart, the rude airline employee put my bag on the conveyor belt after tagging it. The belt stopped and reversed, the bag came back, and I asked the Aegean rep. why. She said without looking at me, "It's overweight! Take it go over there!" and then she ignored me. I said, "I just flew yesterday with your airline and the bag weighed 20.3 kg and there is nothing new in it." She kept ignoring me so I went to a different line, where I waited for 30 minutes to be told my bag was not overweight and indeed did weigh 20.3 kg. In Cairo, when I found out my bag had not arrived, I saw that most of the other passengers on my flight had not gotten theirs either. In fact, I later learned that Aegean Airlines had misplaced or lost the luggage of passengers of five different flights in two days! I had to fill out a form and get a complaint number. I expected to hear from the airline that day telling me they had located my bag, but that didn't happen. The next day I got a message from WorldTracer, a luggage tracing service, that my bag had been located "pending confirmation." For an entire week that message remained on the site. I had one email from Aegean Airlines customer service department informing me the day after my flight that my bag had been located and was being flown to Cairo but that proved not to be true. I emailed and called Aegean Airlines and never got a straight answer about where my bag was. I got emails that told me to "rest assured" that they were doing everything they could to resolve the problem. They never returned my calls and only repeated information about being reimbursed for "first needs" for up to 40 euros per day. The list of information they needed to approve reimbursement was ridiculously long. Finally, a week later and only minutes after speaking with another Aegean Airlines customer services rep. and being told they didn't know the whereabouts of my luggage but were doing everything they could to find it, I got an email from the lost luggage office in Cairo airport telling me my bag had been delivered there and I could pick it up. It cost me two taxi rides and five hours to retrieve my bag from the airport. I spent a week not knowing if I'd ever see my belongings again. Deeply regrettably, I still have one flight ahead of me with this terrible airline and I dread turning over my belongings to them. When I asked them for an upgrade for that flight, they told me they weren't able to do that. I'm sorry I can't change my flight.	0
Terrible! Absolutely terrible! Do not fly this airline. They're extremely rude, spoke down to both my wife and I, did nothing to fix the fact they were late upon arrival which made me miss my connection flight so I had to pay out of pocket a crazy amount of money for a hotel and taxis. The manager at Newark airport has no idea how to perform a good guest experience. And all you get when you try to contact their customer is service is "we're very sorry." That does nothing for me and my scenario. Do yourself a favor and fly any other airline you can no matter how much more it costs, I promise you'll be better off. Aer Lingus is the absolute worst airline I've ever flown with.	0
Zurich to Los Angeles via Dublin. It was the worst airline experience I've ever had. 1. Rip off during online check-in. They make you pay for a regular tourist class seat. I had to pay 65USD just for having a seat 2. Extremely poor, outdated and non-functional entertainment system. 3. Very unfriendly cabin crew 4. Very dirty cabin and toilets 5. Greasy, non-tasty meals 6. Wifi not working 7. Uncomfortably cold cabin temperature. Everyone was wearing jackets and hoods. No blankets available. Overall experience: This airline is overwhelmed by its operation. It feels like they don't know what they're doing.	0
Dublin to Seattle. My luggage was lost on Aer Lingus flight 143 to SEA on 9/26/19 - the reps at the carousel were clueless, they had no access to know if baggage was delayed, they could barely fill out the claims forms (which were very poor copies of an original so faint as to be unreadable). We waited almost an hour after bags starting arriving for them to confirm no more bags remained. I was given no reference # and they said someone would contact me in 2 hrs with the status of my luggage. No one ever called. I called back 5 hrs after the flight landed using the number on the claims form  - it was a off-shore call center (as confirmed later by a rep) but Aer Lingus waas not listed as one of the airlines for service - I used one of the other choices and the rep said they could help - now, 3 hrs after filling the claim i was told they had no record of the luggage and even though it was not in their system, it would arrive on the next day's flight. Next day, 3 hrs after that flight arrived I called again, and was again told they had no info - the rep this time told me in might have been delayed because the plane was "full" put me on hold while he 'contacted the airline. when he came back he said they had no further information - after additional questioning he admitted he had not actually contacted anyone and had no information confirming even the current location of my bag. 3 hrs later i called and was told the luggage didnt arrive but would be on Sunday's flight since they had no flights on the 28th. I asked why they didnt send it on another airline and was told that was not possible. I called again sunday night, 9/29 and the rep said my luggage had been 'expedited' but again he couldn't tell me whether it was on that flight or even where it was. Then he told me it had been scheduled to arrive either 9/27 or 9/28 on another airline - but he could not tell me what airline that was!	0
Düsseldorf to Miami on Air Berlin, an unfriendly crew, giving not the asked service and starting disussing if it is worse to serve - by the way we are Gold Card Member. This is after more than 40 years flying many airlines in first and business class the worst experience we ever had. After return from our trip we wrote a letter to AirBerlin and got the anwer, that they are very sorry - thats it.	0
Los Angeles to Hangzhou via Beijing. Worst travel experience in my life. I was traveling with ac from Los Angeles via Beijing to Hangzhou on April 2nd. The plain landed 15 min late which was not so bad considering the flight was 13 hours long. I missed my connecting flight to Hanghzou due to tight flight connections, disorganization of the Air line and the customs and crew. We never got the entry card on the plane, so 200 people were trying to get the card, find a pen and the space where to fill out the card. At the same time airport staff barely speak English, but they are great in "sign" language. Anything you ask they just use their hands to direct you to go left, right, back or straight. Truly sad. I was directed along with a another passenger to the wrong gate c10 , instead of c4 that directly led to miss my flight literally within 5 min. I needed to go back to the main terminal and change my ticket. I was issued a ticket for next morning and offered hotel stay. When I got to the dingy hotel I was told if I dont want to share the room with another person I will have to pay 200 yuan.  Yes, I end up paying for the hotel! On my way back from Hangzhou to Beijing my flight was delayed 1 hour and 30 min because of "air traffic control". We landed at 2:10. I was running, thru the airport, from domestic to international department, and despite my own belief I managed to get to the gate Lady told me that my ticked was erased and she can not do anything. I needed to go back to change my ticket for the next flight which was 6 hours later, and even this flight was delayed for another 90 min, due to Again "air traffic control" . Thank you For making my trip so miserable. I will make sure to spread the word everywhere I go to let everyone how bad the experience was, and aware travelers to stay away from this airline company.	0
Frankfurt to Bangkok via Beijing. We missed our last flight (Bangkok to Phuket) because the flight from Beijing to Bangkok departed 2.5 hours late. We should have arrived at 18.35 but we arrived at 21.00. We didn’t get refund for the flight we missed and the hotel although it wasn’t our fault.	0
I will write this review as honest, and fairly as I possibly can. By far, Air Canada Rouge is the worst airline I have flown in years. Even compared to other countries ultra budget airlines, AC Rouge sets the standard for negligence and incompetence. I will elaborate, on a beautiful October day, flight from Toronto to Calgary was originally scheduled to leave at 12.30pm ET. It left well over 2.5 hours later. The first aircraft at the gate was delayed by 30 mins due to "technical issues", which turned out to be caused by the baggage compartment doors being stuck. Only after an additional 30 minutes, did they move folks over to an adjacent gate, and different aircraft. Once the people from that flight had all disembarked, including the flight crew (which took about 20 minutes), we all waited another 30 minutes in line while some of the staff were scrambling to switch folks over, and others were standing around doing nothing or talking on their cell phones. Once everyone was on board and settled in, the Captain announced over the intercom that it would be yet another 40 minutes until catering arrived and stocked the aircraft! The seats being cramped and uncomfortable is to be expected. No points there either. Absolutely asinine. For Pete's sake this is a subsidiary of Air Canada, I expected more, and was thoroughly let down. I will avoid them in the future like the plague.	0
Absolutely the worst airline out there. Terrible seat, extremely uncomfortable, rude and unfriendly staff. No snack or screen on a 4 hour flight. They charged us 35$ for checking out one bag on the way to Punta Cana and 35$ again on the way back. They lost our luggage with our home key, car key and all our medications. Nobody accepts the responsibility. They are extremely rude and cheap. The worst airline out there. Stay away! I will never travel with Air Canada again and will never recommend it to anyone.	0
Las Vegas to Toronto. Air Canada is pretty much a disgrace to the Canadian image and the maple leaf. It seriously needs to revamp it's customer experience/service strategy, as well as upgrade a majority of its fleet. Most of the planes, especially those serving its own country and the US are from sometime in the early 90's it seems. Squeaky seats, fraying seatbelts, broken air vents, non-functional lavatories causing huge delays, loss of baggage are just a few examples. Rude staff on the phone and on the planes is another disconcerting issue. Let's pull up our socks, Air Canada, and represent the country the way it deserves to be.	0
Aeroflot is based in Russia where bad weather in winter is not uncommon and for pasengers to endure 12 hour delay overnight in Moscow airport due to weather conditions is unacceptable. The worst way of dealing with delayed passengers, offering them a 7EUR voucher for making them miss their correspondance. Overall very poor quality with no inflight entertainment from London to Moscow.	0
I flew with my 9 yr old son from Heathrow to Shanghai via Moscow. The flight from the London to Moscow had no inflight entertainment or power sockets, not great when flying with a 9yr old. The food was terrible and largely undedible. The staff were so rude. The flight from Moscow to Shanghai, the food again is terrible, the screen on my sons seat was broken, as was the remote control, my headphone socket was hanging off and only 1 ear produced sound. Then on the return journey, broken headphone sockets on both my sons and my seats, bad food and rude staff. The connecting flight from moscow to London had a very old TV system, but again no power and my sons headphone socket produced no sound. Unbeliably bad, especially in this day and age. I purchased this flight after reading reviews that they had significantly improved the flights and service over the years. Dont believe it, but they are as awful as ever.	0
Toronto to San Jose via Mexico City. I had packed a carry on bag, only for the airline to force me to stow it. Upon my arrival to Costa Rica, I noticed my camera bag was gone.  So contacted them via email and telephone only to have no return and then placed on hold for an hour+ only to be hung up on. Clearly they have an issue with the trustworthiness of staff. If you value your belonging, reconsider flying with this airline. The flight there was fairly decent. The return flight airplane was extremely dated and in need of repair.	0
Panama City to New York via Mexico City. I have been to Mexico maybe 6 times in the last two years, including last week. This is the first time the airport crew took my passport in an envelope and kept it with them and won’t give it back until I reach Mexico. The reason being that my passport is from India and they want to understand my business in Mexico, my business is that I am returning home to New York through this pathetic excuse for an airline and I am legally allowed to walk into Mexico as I hold visas from UK, USA and Canada - never again AeroMexico! Once I got to Mexico, I was escorted into a holding room where they had 15 or so people who were in transit without legal grounds in Mexico. I had to show my documents to the officers in the holding room for the airline crew to realize they were wrong to do this. No apologies or nothing, the crew member just said she doesn’t know why “the people” in Panama did that. This was the longest 30 minutes of my life, I managed to take a photo without any of the officers noticing me. You can’t hold me hostage ever again Aer Mexico, no thanks!	0
Antwerp to Toronto via Dublin. Aer Lingus had a problem with the plane on the departure from Antwerp. Rather than ensure that connecting passengers to North America had some assurances that every effort would be made to access a connecting flight, they went silent. And they stayed silent after the email that advised us the plane was finally flown in from Dublin about 2 hours late. Aer Lingus has no portal on their web site that allows anything other than purchase, upgrades and changes to existing flights. They have no service agents available online or by telephone. If you call they will loop you through various options but when you choose a service agent they just start you in the loop again. The cabin staff will not discuss these matters and assure you that you will be dealt with in Dublin. In Dublin the staff just advise you to book a new flight after you are required to retrieve your baggage and not directed to any possible service centre other that one for those wishing to purchase tickets. So after a couple of hours of wasted time, you finally have to force an agent to assist you and she really just wants to book you sometime in the future and give you a hotel credit. And getting there is up to you. The problem with Aer Lingus is that they have no service options online or via telephone and the staff at Dublin is set up to sell tickets, not service victimized customers. I will never fly this airline again. They are a regional carrier that is trying to present itself as a real international carrier. Even now, 6 days after we landed back in Canada, they have not responded to any of our concerns. There is no one to do that.	0
Hangzhou to Johannesburg via Shenzhen. I had the worst experience ever using this flight Air China.I had extra kgs of my luggage which I was suppose to pay for. They told me to pay the amount which was double the actual money that I was suppose to pay. These guys they don't understand at all. I spend about 2 hours talking with them that this amount is too much, you might be doing a mistake. I ended up left my suitcase because I did not have that huge amount they wanted me to pay. When I was now in Shenzhen I asked the other Air China staff the amount I should pay for much kgs and they told me the correct amount but it was now too late because I had left the suitcase in Hangzhou airport. I am very disappointed with this airline and I will never took it again. Now my suitcase is still in China and I am going to incur extra expense to ship it to my country. Also they do not give enough food as compared to other airlines. Air China just give two meals for the whole journey from Shenzhen to Johannesburg. I don't advise anyone to use this airline.	0
Took 4 flights recently on a return trip to Japan. Booked 10 months advanced and requested vegetarian food. First on two flights they had no record of our request. I ended up eating 3 bread rolls as they had nothing else. On the 3rd flight coming home, they somehow had remembered and provided a veggie meal (which was the same as the normal meal, but no meat. Just plain rice!). By this point I had given up hope. Low and behold, the 4th flight was no vegetarian food. How they can let this happen is beyond me, not because of me being a vegetarian, but what happens to those with nut allergies or something? Also, the aircraft's were awful. The final leg home from Beijing to London, we were ferried out into the middle of Beijing airfield, where a lone aeroplane stood, looking very dirty and unused. This plane was from around 1999, with old TV sets, practically no leg room, and uncomfortable seats. Hands down the hardest flight I've had to endure. Will pay more next time and fly with a company like Singapore.	0
Toronto to Panama City. A 5 hour flight in an aircraft designed for domestic flights. No room for the legs, no food (not even a cracker), 2 glasses of tap water, a crowded and warm plane and no entertainment system. They lost my sleeping bag and refuse to take the claim at the airport.	0
I flew Air Canada Rouge (booked by our Travel Agent, we saw Air Canada and thought 'great' we didn’t realise that they were their budget fleet) for three flights in September 2019 from Manchester to Toronto and Calgary and then Vancouver back to Manchester. I was with my husband and his parents. All three flights were delayed leaving: First Flight: two and a quarter hours delay taking off because of a fuel light fault (this should have been sorted before we boarded and sat there all that time - preventable) Second Flight: an hour late leaving owing to a staff shortage for that flight (this should have been sorted out before we boarded - preventable) Third Flight: 15 minutes late leaving because of a late boarding passenger (not really Rouges fault). On our first flight, the delay in leaving almost caused us to miss our connection in Toronto. We managed to make it to our connecting plane Boarding Passes in hand, only to be told we had been removed (our seats undoubtedly re-sold). After much dithering, the staff managed to re assign us. However, our luggage didn’t make the flight as Rouge had decided to put it on a later flight (ours and lots of other peoples) but didn’t think to tell us, so we waited ages at the carousel the other end unnecessarily. Eventually and after much anxiety on our part it all arrived at our hotel in the middle of the night. My husband and I were in Premium Economy. The seats were extremely hard and uncomfortable. Seatbelts were short with not much room to slacken. The legroom was fine, but you couldn’t stretch out as there was a large mounting bracket beneath the seat in front. The overhead bins were minuscule. The iPads we were given to entertain us on the return flight wouldn’t connect properly, saying there was an error. We couldn’t be bothered to report it as we were so tired. It looked like everyone else’s was the same. The food was just ok and nothing special. Air stewards on all flights were friendly enough, but did seem disinterested. My in-laws were in Economy and experienced all of the above, except smaller seats and no in-flight entertainment. Unfortunately, their seats weren’t clean either, attached is a picture of the gap in my mother-in-laws footwell, it was absolutely filthy and there appeared to be months of old litter and food debris. Unfortunately, as a whole Air Canada Rouge was pretty poor and it’s highly unlikely that we will ever use them again, or recommend them to anyone.	0
Toronto to Edmonton. This is the worst airline I have ever flown, the staff were so very rude. They have you squashed in there like sardines, you cannot move, you are constantly bumping the seat in front of you, as is the person sitting behind you. The seats, if you could call them that was like sitting on concrete, you literally had to crawl over the armrest to get out of your seat as there is no leg room at all. I have never been so uncomfortable in my entire life. The staff were horrible and when coming around with the beverage cart, they kept skipping rows and not bothering to ask people if they wanted anything. No in-flight entertainment at all, not even a place to plug in your headphones to at the very least listen to music. This airline is a joke if you ever see Air Canada rouge come up, stay far away. I tried to opt-out of giving any star ratings at all because they truly deserve nothing, but it would not allow me to submit otherwise.	0
Guadalajara to Chicago O-Hare. Do not recommend this airline. Do not understand how paying extra for priority seating gets you last on the plane. Also having your carry on baggage removed and taken down with all the other luggage just because the flight did not have enough space. Makes no sense that I paid extra money and for the staff to be rude and not find a spot to put my luggage at and just take it out and give it to a person to put down not acceptable. Do not recommend this airline what so ever. Worst flight ever. Not worth it.	0
Boston to Faro via Dublin. Aer lingus gave me the worst travel experience I've ever seen in over 30 years of frequent flying. tldr: Last minute flight cancellation, no reroute options, rude and slow customer service and non transparent and misguiding compensation and refund policy. Details: I booked a flight from Seattle to Faro connecting in Boston and Dublin to attend a wedding. The flight was supposed to land in Terminal 2 at 7 AM which as per the Irish department of justice website will not require entry into Ireland. "Unless your arrival flight and onward connecting flight is in Terminal 2 between the hours of 0400 and 1600, you will need to go landside to make your onward connecting flight". First, my initial flight from Seattle was cancelled hours before departure. I accidentally checked my email before heading to the airport and found the notification. I called their customer support and was kept on hold for 90 mins, the customer service agent was rude and offered a reroute that arrives 2 days after my initial arrival date, which meant I will miss the main purpose of the trip and attend the wedding I am supposed to. When I asked him for an earlier option, he placed me on hold again and phone was disconnected after a min. I called again and waiting around 60 mins on hold again before I was automatically disconnected again. I called for a third time and finally got to an agent after almost 80 mins. She gave me another ticket that exchanged my 12 hour flight for a 24 hour flight with 10 hour wait in Boston. I accepted the offer since I had no other choice. Second: I did fly to Boston through a JetBlue flight and the agent did check me in and routed my luggage directly to Faro airport. I arrived in Boston and waited the 10 hours during which I checked in again with an aer lingus agent who checked my passport and gave me a boarding pass and explicitly marked "Visa OK" on it after asking me a number of time where my final destination is. At the gate, the agent asked all passengers to check in at the desk to confirm luggage. I did and he checked my passport and issued me a new boarding pass . An hour later, I was not allowed to board to the plane by the aer lingus agent as I don't have a transit visa to Dublin. I spent the next hours running from Jetblue agents to Aer lingus agents who exchanged blame in a rude and humiliating manner. Even calling Aer lingus support line didn't help. Eventually they offered to return me back to Seattle using my $1360 ticket. As a result, I missed my vacation and didn't attend my best friend's wedding, I lost the $1360 ticket and $2000 of hotel reservations, car rentals and other arrangements After almost one week, Aer lingus did not reply to my claim for refund or compensation, although the regulations mentioned on their website explicitly mention my right for compensation in case of one side cancellation.	0
Amsterdam to Cork. Although there was a huge queue for the passport control at Amsterdam Airport and had to spend 45 minutes in security lines, I managed to get to the gate 15 minutes before departure time, but the assistant didn't let me on board, as the door was already closed. They ruined my birthday weekend with my family. They refuse to give any refund, the customer service is not available during weekends and during weekdays after 20 minutes waiting time they hang up if they receive a complaint.	0
Los Angeles to Edinburgh via Dublin. Absolutely terrible customer service. My luggage was lost by Aer Lingus on 16/8/19 on the flight from Los Angeles to Edinburgh and despite chasing them up almost everyday I still do not have my luggage 11 days later! I keep getting promised a call back and nothing happens. Do not use them.	0
I am a oneworld Emerald for many years but made a huge mistake by changing from Air Berlin recently. Shanghai to Dusseldorf via Abu Dhabi, Shanghai to Dusseldorf leg was operated by Etihad Airways which was excellent. Upon arrival in AUH I was told that Air Berlin had a aircraft change due to technical problems. The new aircraft would only have Economy seats. That was the first time ever I booked a ticket where a Air Berlin business class is involved and then Air Berlin shows up all economy. Etihad offered me to rebook on AUH to MUC in Etihad business class and MUC to DUS on AB Eco. I obviously took that offer as I really think that no matter what happens, Air Berlin will always stay that "low cost" carrier in peoples minds because they dont really do something to improve that. I finally got confirmation for that theory once I got to the gate in MUC to board. Chaos, no priority boarding, unfriendly ground and onboard staff, narrow seats. What other points you need to be a real low cost carrier. Air Berlin please go check the big guys and learn how to treat your frequent travelers right! The rating here is strickly for Air Berlin.	0
New York JFK to Tokyo via Beijing. On February 16, 2019, I boarded an Air China flight from JFK to Beijing at 2:30 am. After departing, I noticed that my television at my seat (54J) was not working and informed the flight attendant. The flight attendant did a reset twice and also attempted to play a movie which failed. I also noticed that my headrest was also broken as it would not fold in. After speaking to the flight attendant, I was told to change to seat 51E. Before heading to seat 51E, I ate dinner then informed that flight attendant that I was going to move, in which she replied “okay.” When I arrived to seat 51E, I noticed that no one was seated in the seat. Approximately 10 mins later, a woman came over and started screaming that I was in her seat and proceeded to shove me. I explained to her that the flight attendant told me to sit there. However, I would be more than happy to switch with her. She proceeded to scream “you moved my stuff” as she grabbed her items from the seat pocket in front of me. Clearly, her items were not moved as she grabbed them herself. Then, the woman called over the flight attendant and continue to yell for approximately the next 10 mins in Mandarin, disturbing and waking up other passengers. After the flight attendants walked away, the customer grabbed the booklets from the seat pocket, safety guide, and bag and threw them at me and then down the aisle, which caused a flight attendant to return. After this incident, I was asked to move to seat 34K. This airline does not care about their passengers. Beware!	0
Flight 1: I arrived early to Detroit - 3 hours early because international flight. They would not take my checked bag because I was too early. They stated that they only take check bags 1 hour prior to boarding time. This meant I was stuck sitting in the pre-security area of the airport for 2 hours. I had no access to food. Flight 2: Delayed leaving Toronto. Obtained updates via text that changed 10 times and had 3 gate changes in the airport. Flight 3: My assigned seat was given to someone else. I was told, oh there are empty seats. I found one myself. When we boarded it was raining - they closed the doors and then we were told we had to wait to take off. Waited for over 30 mins. Flight 4: No issues. Picked up bag only to find it must have sat on the tarmac in the rain at flight 3 time - everything in my bag was soaked when I got it. Flight 2 and 3 were on larger planes that appeared to be newer but no power plugs for phones or iPads. App for movie worked fine. I was not impressed at all. Will avoid flying with Air Canada rouge in the future!	0
Las Vegas to Toronto. Very rude staff. No snacks offered. Asked for water twice, half hour later no one brought it. When asked for the third time they started giving attitude like it's our fault. The plane was half full yet they lied saying it overfilled and people need to check in their carry on. Plane was delayed. The board information was not updated until the last second. Will never fly Air Canada again.	0
Calgary to Toronto. First time flying with Air Canada rouge and the last. The aircraft smelled like a children's daycare center, probably not cleaned for some time. The crew seemed totally uninterested and displayed an "I wish I was not here attitude". The flight was fine, left early and arrived early but no comparison with an actual Air Canada flight.	0
This was the worst airline I have ever bought a ticket from. I had to change my trip because of a death in the family and was looking forward to using my credit (after additional cost) however the cancellation policy was lost in translation and I was told I had one year to use it. Not the case. Two weeks after the one year mark of the original purchase I call to book and they’re sorry “I will have to take it as a loss”. I would have happily paid to extend it - now I will never give them my business. Good customer service doesn’t cost a company anything, and keeps people coming back. Disappointed is an understatement after the Experience with Aeromexico. Do not bother!	0
Vancouver to El Salvador via Mexico City. I can not put into words how bad the customer service is with this airline and the lack of caring and inability to provide a basic level of service. We did not even make it onto our flight due to outrageous prices to re book a flight on top of our original purchased tickets and with penalty fees. We lost a vacation and a lot of money. I do not understand how an airline is allowed to operate out of a Canadian airport and only offer by phone customer service back to the defunct business they are allowed to run in Mexico. I hope that if anyone reads this before considering flying with this airline please re consider at all costs. This airline is criminal.	0
I flew from London to Cairo via Athens. Once arrived in Cairo we found that one of our bags went missing. We filled in a report form and told we would be contacted shortly. We received no reply for the duration of 2 weeks at which point I went to their office on the 4th floor in Cairo airport to find out that the bag had arrived and was returned once again to Athens. We were never contacted or informed of its arrival. The lady I spoke to said she would contact Athens and request for it to be returned. 2 weeks later we still have no bag and the office in Cairo is saying they have received no reply from Athens. Absolute shambles.	0
Athens to Hamburg. Overall a very bad experience. We boarded the aircraft for the flight to Hamburg through a jetway and while taxiing they told us that there is a problem and we had to change aircraft. We were waiting inside the aircraft without any other information and about an hour later we were asked to deplane to a bus and then board another aircraft through a boarding ramp.  Aegean could have used a jetway to avoid this hassle and they should have better informed us about the expected delay. We arrived at Hamburg delayed by at least 2 hours and no apology throughout the flight. All staff behaved as if nothing had happened. My family missed their train connections and had to pay for new expensive tickets.	0
We flyed from Tenerife to Dublin on the 06/08/2019. We arrived to Dublin on the 07/08 at 12:30am. Our big suitcase went missing. Now is 72 hours and still nothing! We filled Up the form on the airport with a very rude lady from aer lingus. I calling them every day since,but nothing. I called Tenerife airport and they confirmed that my bag leave Tenerife with me on the aircraft heading to Dublin. What else I Can do? Unprofessional service on the ground and aircraft as well.	0
Aer Lingus lost our baggage on a flight from Dublin to Edinburgh 7 days ago. We did everything we were asked. We gave the address to the hotel where we were staying but the baggage never arrived. We requested that the baggage be sent to Glasgow Airport and held until Friday August 2nd Where we would be flying out of next and Aer Lingus representative agreed to do so and we have a confirmation. Once we arrived in to Glasgow Airport we were told the baggage was sent back to Edinburgh for some unknown reason. We have traveled without personal belongings for 7 days because the team has lied to us and been unprofessional.  After many phone calls, emails, and claims on their website we still are unsure where the baggage is or if we will ever see it again. We have requested that the baggage be mailed to our home to which they agreed. As of this morning however they can no longer locate our baggage. This is bad communication, bad service, and overall unprofessionalism.	0
Flew on leisure as a couple. Tried to book window/aisle seats in advance (16 EUR per person and segment). Airline said "no it's against the regulations" and forced us to book either window/middle or middle/aisle seat. Never heard of such regulation before. Other than that the usual mediocre AB service standards, chaotic check-in and boarding. You get what you pay for.	0
Flight started with two hours delay though the plane arrived in Rome from a previous flight with only marginal delay. Boarding was a total chaos with no pre-boarding for status clients. No reasons for a delay were given before boarding and no announcements were made by ground staff. Flight was then rerouted to Hannover with a subsequent 3 hour bus ride to Berlin because the airport in Berlin closes at 11 pm. and the flight left Rome only at 10.40 pm. The passengers were not informed until 15 minutes before the plane landed in Hannover though it must have been clear in Rome before the start that the flight was not going to Berlin.	0
Toronto to Bucharest. Contacted Customer Care at Air Canada and have been provided with links to the policies of the company - very much useless. Paid over 2 thousand dollars for my parents for an international flight, paid about 300 dollars round trip for regular check in luggage below 23 kg. My parents got a piece of bread dipped in maple syrup, no free coffee or tea on the flight to Bucharest last night. Will think twice before booking Air Canada. I will not make that mistake again.	0
Las Vegas to Toronto. There was nothing premium (or Rouge's version of Business Class) about this aircraft or service. First, the aircraft: a very old 767 where the overhead bins were not configured to match today's carry-on baggage. Thankfully, my carry-on was only partially filled because I had to push that down to squeeze it into the bin above my seat. The seat itself looked premium class in a 2 by 2 by 2 configuration. On take-off and landing everything rattled and shook and I was actually surprised the plane made the flight without falling to pieces. Service: only a bottle of water laid on the seat with no pre-flight drink service like other "business class" offerings from other airlines. The wine, if one wants to call it that, was barely drinkable and I chose the pasta meal choice because the curry from the butter chicken was making me nauseous and I was in row 1! The crew did the mandatory service of drinks followed by lunch then a snack before landing. However, in between all of this there was hardly any follow-up with the premium class passengers. They were more concerned with ensuring that the curtain from the cabin to the galley was shut solid with the velcro closures. Getting to Vegas I used a different airline where the service was top notch as it should for business class but the kicker: the other airline cost was about 70% less than what I paid for this dreadful flight!	0
Venice to Toronto. Horrible experience with this airline. Will never fly with Air Canada rouge again. We were delayed due to mechanical issues for nearly 3 hours causing us to miss our connection. Wouldn’t do anything to help and had the attitude that they got us from point A to B so who cares what time it was supposed to get in. Awful customer service. Entertainment system kept freezing up the whole flight. All in all a terrible experience.	0
Vancouver to Merida via Mexico City. It have never experienced a worst customer service anywhere. We booked a Business Class flight to Merida from Vancouver and it was uneventful, it was not bad but was not good. Mediocre food and mediocre customer service. On our way back is when it became a nightmare we had a 2 hour delay due a mechanical problem in our plane, we had to connect in Mexico City and after running with bags and cases to the gate 15 minutes before the plane will took off. The lady at the gate did not want to let us in (we were still in time to board), they were many passengers in our delayed flight and was actually fault of Aeromexico, but she say nobody inform her about the delay. She simply didn't want to help or even call a superior to help, she was rude and completely careless. She send us to another stand to make changes in our flight and we got one flight but in Economy, even they had seats in Business Class. They didn't offer absolutely any compensation or apology for the now 8 hours delay in the flight. Then at home, we called and emailed many several times for many hours and months where we have dealt with so many different people and phone numbers, they just refuse to compensate the delay and the downgrade on our tickets as it was our fault. They offered a ridiculous upgrade with a code where you have to call a special number and that only apply to specific flights and so on, practically an offer you cannot claim. I feel scammed and robbed, we pay for a service and they didn't provide it and they simply refuse to reimburse what we pay, or the difference of it. I have flown many times and with many different airlines and I have never experience a completely lack of empathy of the customer service personnel. It's almost as if Aeromexico sees customers as a threat, forgetting we are paying a service that they seem unable to provide. If you can avoid it, then choose another airline. Aeromexico will make sure you have a horrible travel experience.	0
Mexico City to Austin. This is the worst airline. They will work to make you miss your connection, and force you to re-buy your ticket. You would be better off walking.  Over a month later I still shudder to remember flying with them. Constant stress and extortion. They should be permanently grounded.	0
I flew from London to Athens in July 2018 with 4 bags, paying extra for the service. Only 2 bags arrived. I made a report on arrival. The following day I was flying from Athens to Luxor via Cairo. I received an email after I had checked on for my flight that my bags had been found. As I had 2 hours before departure I had time to go and reclaim them. I went downstairs and was shown a store room, my bags were there however one of them a 33kg bag I had paid for was ripped and was not in any condition to make any extra journeys. At the desk I was offered that they could replace the one big broken bag with 2 smaller ones. I accepted and I took one of the bags to Egyptair and checked it on whilst leaving the other with their supervisors to check in so I didn’t have to pay a fine for an extra bag. This bag was left in with them to send on the same flights and meet me in Luxor. The bag didn’t arrive plus I didn’t have any ticket for the bags to trace. I started the very very long and painful process of trying to find my bag via email. This was 7 weeks ago. Every week I get the same generic email that says they are at my disposal and want to help. Finally yesterday I had an email telling me to go to Luxor airport and get my bags proving me with ticket references. I arrive at Luxor airport only to find they have provided the ticket of the bags from London to Athens which are shown as claimed. But their email states this are from Athens to Luxor. This is the most ridiculous situation I’ve ever encountered. How can an airline lose your bags twice and provide ticket numbers from previous flights.	0
7/12 ready to fly home from Edinburgh to Hartford CT via Dublin. We were told the connector from Edinburgh to Dublin was late and we couldn’t fly to Hartford. We were re-routed to Heathrow and then to Boston and were told by Aer Lingus that we were ‘on our own in Boston’. We had to wait at he Edinburgh airport for 5 hours before boarding the flight to Heathrow and were given a measly 5 pound credit for food. When we complained about being stuck in Boston at 9:30p.m. They said this happens all the time. Basically they couldn’t get rid of us fast enough. A terrible experience at every level.	0
We had to disembark the plane due to brake failure and spend the night at a hotel.  No one to show us where to go to get hotel voucher etc. Due to it being around 11pm the hotel was not offering any food and I was told I could go downstairs in the airport where there was a supermarket. Drag my luggage down there now.  The next day I check in only to discover my boarding tag was made out to some woman continuing on to Bangkok. I told them I was going to Abu Dhabi only, but the guy at the check in counter said it was ok. So back to the service desk. They issue me a new boarding pass and ensure my luggage would arrive in Abu Dhabi. Of course it didn't, and to make matters worse, they did not give me a claim ticket on the new pass. Again no apology. After clearing security I am asked to return to the ticket counter. Back through the airport again. All they wanted was to say my luggage would be ok and to apologize. At least someone finally said they were sorry. I get to the gate and the plane was latte leaving by an hour. Very arrogant and ignorant people at the gate.  As people said earlier, bad food and tiny seats. 	0
Changed gate with no notice on board, made hundreds of already checked in customers wait in a hallway near the gate for over an hour with no explanation or communication of any kind. There was no reason for the wait except to tell us that the flight was delayed 5 more hours, and to give us a tiny credit to one food concession stand which could not come close to paying for the lunch we were now going to need to buy in the airport. We showed up to the proper gate early only to be told there was an additional hours delay. Got on board only to be told there would be another hours delay. Husband who is 5'9 and 150 lbs was unable to sit in his seat without his knees cutting into the metal frame structure of the back of the seat ahead of him. His seat did not recline at all and his screen for movies/tv did not work. He was in pain and discomfort for the whole time we waited on-board.	0
Montreal to Chiang Mai via Beijing. Worst international travel experience. After booking my flight, I could not request a special meal, seriously, all means failed, North America customer service phone number that no one answer despite holding for hours, email that is published on their website for north america that bounce back and does not exist, and website that denied me access to login. 2Meals on the flight were absolutely disgusting from my views. Connecting time is very short end up not to catch my next connecting flight, and could not find any staff of this airline or any counter for them in the YUL airport, despite on the flight I was told as soon as you leave the luggage area, you will see our staff and our counter, there was nothing to be found. In flight washroom was not clean and toilet cover does not stay open, meaning dis-functional. In flight from Chiang Mai to Beijing, the noise from the Chinese tourist was over whelming and yelling in the flight as if they in the back street of a Chinese village. The seat was not comfortable, not enough leg room, no stage to keep anything personal in front of you. In general not recommended airline to fly with, and customer service is not on there focus at all.	0
I advise to avoid this airline at any cost! Cabin crew on the international flights can’t communicate in any other language than Chinese. At the same time you would not find them neither attentive nor friendly nor pleasant at occasion. Food is very average. What was the worst part of the trip is how unfriendly I was treated when relocated myself and occupied free seat in first row. They literally had all the seats unoccupied in the first row (apparently unless you pay for these seats during booking, they won’t even open them during checkin), so I decided to take the seat (being 190cm tall) for that 11 hours journey,  it didn’t take long for a flight assistant to approach me and insist I return to my original seat (still same coach cabin) because “these seats were 100$ more expensive”. The overall experience was very bad for that flight and service and I next time I would do anything not to fly with Air China, so should you..	0
Deer Lake to Toronto. Flew to Newfoundland on Friday and flight was delayed over 2 hours due to mechanical problems. Now trying to fly back to Toronto on Monday after a great weekend only to be delayed 4 hours due to mechanical problems. I love Newfoundland (born in Ontario) but stay away from this airline - Rouge is a nightmare.	0
Toronto to San Pedro via Mexico. Do not travel with Aeromexico! My husband and I planned this vacation for 5 days in Honduras, where we have friends and since we bought the tickets through an agency we never were told that my husband needed a special permit to get into Honduras due to his nationality. When the date comes we get to the airport and the girl who checked us in never mentioned or asked us about this permit when checking our documentation. She only asked us for our USA visa and our Canadian visa which we had. After we get to Mexico City and the same thing happened. Nobody told us about this permit even though they knew about the final destination was Honduras. When we got to Honduras the Migration agent didn’t let us in as my husband didn’t have this permit. So we went to claim the airline for letting us get to that point without notifying us what we needed when checking our documentation and all we received was a very bad attitude, unprofessional and disrespectful like we owe them something. The information we got from every single person that we talked to was inconsistent and they kept avoiding responsibility and telling us that it was migration fault to not let us in. Which is ridiculous. Another guy at Mexico City told us that the airline was not responsible to ask the passengers Or check if their travel documentation were in order. We have traveled around the world and the first thing the airline ask for is your visa or permit in order to let you get into the plane. Anyway, They gave us a return ticket to Mexico but didn’t give us a connection ticket from Mexico to Toronto, and when we asked for it they would through the responsibility to other members a part from that they didn't give us time to even communicate to our friends who were waiting for us on the other side. After that we realized that they assigned us separate seats and when we asked to help us getting two seats together they got angry at us like it was our fault. staff not helpful or even interested to be accommodative. The story keeps going on. After all my husband and I found a common factor of this company Aeromexico don't care about the customer, all they care about is our money. Garbage Service!	0
New York to Lima via Mexico City. The worst experience of my life. They are totally inflexible, the treatment to the client is terrible, inhuman. I made a 3-day trip to Peru for the death of a family member and on my return to NY they did not let me board the flight because I did not have an American residency letter in process. I had to take 4 extra days and pay almost $ 600 for the letter from the embassy, ​​which told me that this happened only because of the REGULATIONS OF THE AIRLINE. After this I tried to take a flight as soon as possible back to NY since I was losing many days of work, in addition to having left my 2 little children of 2 and 4 years and with whom I had many responsibilities. The airline did absolutely nothing to help me. On the contrary, they wanted to charge me $ 2000 for the change of ticket since the only available space was in premium class and that seat can not be sold "like that". Finally, due to the lack of empathy and support from Aeromexico, I had to buy another ticket in LATAM for $ 726 one way and FOR CERTAIN NEVER REQUESTED ME THE EMBASSY LETTER for which I spent 5 days doing the procedure.	0
Terrible customer service at Heathrow check-in and boarding gate. There was no Aegean Airlines staff to assist passengers. The staff at check-in and at the gate appeared to be untrained or poorly trained, and two of them were rude, abrupt, and unwilling to help me with a simple issue about my baggage excess weight with one stating to leave me behind if I did not reduce the excess weight and the other at the gate, forced me to check in my quite small cabin bag in which I had my laptop, hard drive and other equipment.	0
Dublin to London. I had a flight booked as a stop over with another airline. I flew Aer Lingus just to transfer airports to the actual airline I booked through. Because of this third party booking I could not use the kiosk to print my boarding pass. I asked the woman at the kiosk for help and she told me to use the kiosk, when I explained the issue she told me that the kiosk was the only way to print my boarding pass. I tried to get help at the ticketing counter and was told they could not help because I had already purchased a ticket. By this point I was an hour and fifteen minutes into the process. I then stood in another line to get help from the baggage drop. Two people in a row went on break as I got to the front of the line leaving one person to help close to 200 people still in line. Then she shut down her line to help priority board the people who’s gates had closed. Finally got my boarding pass print after almost two hours in line. I then tried to check my bags in the automated line and was flagged because I was flying to the United States. I waited almost 5 minutes for someone to notice the big red light over my bags and come assist. No one did. I asked the man sitting in the empty line next to me for help (business class assistance line) and he told me that he would not help and that I needed to go find someone who would help me. Finally managed to find help. All in all it took over two hours to print a boarding pass and check my bags. I emailed customer service to simply make them aware of these issues and they have been more than unhelpful. She told me she could not help because I would not give her a valid booking number even though I have explained several times that I do not have one for her airline since I did not book with them to begin with. She also decided to assign a gender role when speaking with me. When I corrected her mistake and explained that I was offended by her presumption I was told it was my fault for not providing my gender when filing my complaint. I was so shocked by her response that I felt the need to address it with her supervisor. I asked twice to be transferred to a supervisor and in response they have stopped responding to my emails. All I wanted to do was let this company know about the problems I experienced. Instead I have receive some of the worst customer service of my life.	0
On the 13.06.2019. I had my flight with Aer Lingus from Dublin to Lyon. I purchased two hour lounge access with it for EUR 30.00 as i had a good experience with Dublin Airport lounges in the past. This is the most pathetic excuse for an airport lounge i have ever seen and i been to a lot of them. The selection of drinks was limited. The place was dirty, there was no food.  Next door, there is a far better lounge. After that my flight was delayed but nobody cared to communicate this to us. Then on the 16.06.2019. I could not view my boarding pass even though i had checked in the day before. I had to go to the counter to check in.  We arrived a little later at the Dublin airport, where my luggage was misplaced. I spoke to the ground staff and reported luggage as missing. Asked the ground staff on how to proceed next, and was advised they will find my luggage within 72 hours. 72 hours later still no luggage but an SMS to call them. After speaking to an associate for 30 minutes and not getting anywhere i asked for a supervisor and was promised a supervisor call back in an hours time. 20.06 filled out lost baggage survey and called customer support as i did not receive promised supervisor call back. Was transfered to a supervisor who told that this will be resolved in 5 days. I asked him what will happen if not, he said that this won´t be the case. That if not found they will consider it lost! 21.06 in the late afternoon called them again. Spoke to another person telling me that they found my luggage and will deliver it to be today or tomorrow. 22.06 late afternoon called again as i haven´t received my luggage. was advised, that they are still checking if this is my luggage. Then on the 25.06 i called again asking for an update. They said they still don´t have one. I asked to talk to supervisor and was promised a supervisor call back within an hour. At 07:00 pm i called again insisting to speak to a supervisor and spoke to the most incompetent supervisor i have ever dealt.  If a customer doesn't have their luggage for several days has spend hours on the phone you do not sigh at them.  I also escalated to Aerlingus via fb while they were quick to respond, no body took accountability for the action. Nobody from the complaints department reached out to me to find out what happened.	0
Seoul to Guangzhou via Tianjin. This was the worst travel experience I have had yet. The first leg of my journey was fairly smooth, but the airplane itself was old and threadbare. When it came time for the transfer, the flight was delayed and the gate changed, but this was not announced clearly and no staff was left at the old gate to redirect passengers. The second plane was also careworn and foul-smelling, and it would be generous to call the food mediocre. The plane was quite old and uncomfortable. When I tried to raise the headrest on my seat, it wouldn't move, so I had to stand up and push harder. At that point, the headrest flew off the rails and into the row behind me, hitting the man and woman there. The seat in front of me could not be put back fully upright, so that passenger's seat was leaning into me, even during mealtime. I would need to have a huge price margin between Air China and the next closest competitor before I would fly this airline again.	0
I was supposed to be flying from Tokyo to Hanoi via a transit flight through Beijing. The two flights was supposed to be 9 hours maximum, but due to a 40 minutes delay of the first flight, a lot of other customers and myself missed our transit. Even though the ground staff in Haneda airport assured me that I would meet my flight, I suddenly found myself freezing and stranded in the unknown land of Beijing for 9 hours, waiting for the next flight. To make matters worse, it was not to my intended destination. I had to take a flight to Seoul, waited there for another 4 hours, before flying another airline from Seoul to Hanoi. To sum it up, I wasted 26 hours of my time travelling whereas I should only have spent 9. The airline did not bother setting up accommodation for any of the guests, offering only a meagre amount of 200 yuan (less than 30 dollars) as “compensation”, which, realistically speaking, is nowhere near enough for a hotel room. The staff were rather unhelpful and unprofessional. As far as I am concerned, I did not receive any apologies throughout the whole ordeal. The only “explanation” given was that “More than 20000 other guests are also in the same situation”. This “explanation” to me sounds more like an admission of inefficiency on their part than anything really. My luggage, which was stuck in Beijing, was handled without an ounce of care. It was just put randomly in front of the Air China office with no one to look after and could have been easily stolen. The ground staff were extremely unfriendly and unprofessional. When I came to the Air China luggage office, despite the fact that there were 3 staff members on duty, they did not respond to my questions despite my repeated gesturing, preferring to chat among themselves instead. Overall, I had an extremely unsatisfying experience with ChinaAir and will not ever use this service again. I do NOT recommend this airline to anyone.	0
Flying with Air Canada Rouge from Athens to Toronto was my most difficult experience so far. In addition to pay extra for alcoholic drinks, ear phones, seats designated for mothers and babies, I had to pay for entertainment. The internet is very expensive and charged by hour.  The flight was 11 hours. Traveling with an 18 months old baby, I was forced to purchase the WiFi service, $42.50 for the whole flight. There was no written instruction in the seat pocket so the pilot gave us instructions in the beginning. With a baby sleeping on my lap, I had to call for help. The flight attendant gave a brief instructions and left. My credit card was charged but the page crashed. I could not use the service. Again I had to asked for help, the flight attendant came and advised that she cannot troubleshoot and we have to chat with ground.  My husband had to spend half an hour just to get the refund for that transaction. I was given a notice to hold my baby when the seat belt sign was on for so long during the flight and there was no turbulence.  We were offered hot drinks two times during the flight and due to the turbulence we could not have them, I understand it's because of safety but they should come back after the seat belt sign is off to serve those who wish to have hot drinks. This is a service that it has been paid for. At the time of check-in we asked for a seat with bassinet. Although that there was a free one but we had to pay extra plus since the baby was older than 1 year, he could not use the bassinet due to the safety issue.  So what's the use of paying extra if I cannot use the bassinet in this flight.  The food was awful. There was absolutely no accommodation for the young children and babies, Unfriendly staff. I chose this flight because I had good experience with Air Canada. I did not know that Rouge is different.	0
Buenos Aires to London via Mexico City. My seat and entertainment area were broken for the whole duration of the flight. We booked Premier class seats so we could have a fully reclining seat on a long flight. These tickets are 4x the price of a normal seat and are advertised as extremely comfortable, fully reclining seat and so on. Could not use any of the features Premier stands for and the upright position of the seat is stiff and uncomfortable. Their reaction was: "You need to contact customer services to get compensation, there is nothing we can do." Customer services finally got back to me and they claim and I quote: "the entertainment services inside our aircraft are considered courtesy." What do you pay so much extra for in premier class if it is all considered a courtesy? I don't even care about the entertainment, it is the seat and back support you really pay for but as it is completely electronic chances are those don't even work and you still can not lie down. At least in economy you can move the back of the seat back a little regardless if there are electronic issues! The Customer service is terrible as they don't care about anyone. You have to be lucky that even when you pay a lot of extra money you get a working seat. A gamble we are not taking again.	0
Five of us flew from LAX to CAN, each of us had 1 carry on luggage and 1 personal bag. We checked the Aeromexico website prior to our flight and the information there was we are allowed one carry on with 22lbs each. We had no problem with our luggages from LAX-CAN. But to our surprise when we are flying back to LA, Aeromexico ground stewardess was weighing our carry on luggage together with our personal bags, so obviously all of us are going to have overweight baggage. We explained our side that from LA we didnt have the same problem but the staff are not accommodating. We had a bad experience with this kind of service and probably won’t be flying with Aeromexico again. We had to check in three pieces of luggage and will have to wait for it at LAX. Had we known that our personal luggages will be included in the 22lbs allowance, we should've prepared better. I dont see the point checking the baggage information in their website if it is not clear. It is the first time that I encountered an airline weighing the personal bag of their customers.	0
Brussels to San Francisco via Dublin. I have never in my life experienced such poor customer service. I booked a flight from BRU to SFO, but due to weather and slow ground operations at DUB airport I ended up missing my connection to SFO. I got rebooked onto a flight from DUB to JFK and JFK to SFO. Not only did this add 15 additional hours to my trip they also managed to lose my bags in JFK. When I finally arrived in SFO at 3am after 30h of traveling, all 3 of my bags were missing. Additionally I had made a bid to upgrade to business class, based on the information I was given: a flight from DUB to SFO. However when I got rebooked, I got downgraded to economy for the second leg of the flight. And of course, availability isn’t always there, but when I raised this issue with them, they refused to compensate me or give me a partial refund. Over the course of 4 days I made over 16 phone calls, filled out multiple complaint claims, reached out to them on twitter. But they did nothing to help me retrieve my bags. I kept getting the same standard answer over and over again: As American Airlines were your final carrier they will need to trace the missing baggage. In our industry, it's the final carrier's responsibility to return the delayed baggage. They will work directly with us on your behalf to return the bags to you as soon as possible. And indeed, they tried to work with Aer Lingus. They put in 3 requests to get the bags transferred onto their system. But Aer Lingus was  unresponsive. I also reached out to Aer Lingus’s own delayed baggage department, who also put in a request and sent 2 emails to raise this issue. Yet again, not a single response from Aer Lingus. As a result, my bags are still being held hostage in the Aer Lingus terminal at JFK. After yet another attempt to raise awareness with Aer Lingus on twitter, I got shut down without any meaningful response. This seems to be their thing: making customers go away as fast as possible while providing zero help. Filing a complaint on Aer Lingus has been designed to frustrate and infuriate people.  Of course, things won’t always go according to plan, and often there’s not much that can be done about it, but a company like Aer Lingus should have a proper system for dealing with complaints in a timely manner, supported by caring staff. Putting customers through the same form over and over again is only designed to make them go away.	0
In May 2015 I caught the flight from Chicago O'Hare to Berlin Tegel. The aircraft was an Airbus 330. I was allocated a window seat but had no window. A woman who had paid an extra $50 for a window found herself in the same position but was not given a window. The aircraft was very overheated and had no individual air vents above the seats. The individual lights above my seat illuminated my neighbour rather than my seat. There were inadequate numbers of toilets for the large number of passengers. This resulted not only in severe discomfort for passengers but the water supply ran out in the toilet closest to me resulting in toilet paper not being flushed. The food was as cheap and nasty as I have ever had in Economy. I am not tall but had very little leg room. I could do very little work not only due to the shortage of space but the intense heat of the aircraft. The TV and movie selection was OK but not great but the TV screen in the back of the seat in front of me kept skipping or freezing every time the passenger in that seat vibrated the seat - extremely irritating. On approach to Berlin droplets of water started to drip on me and the passengers around me. On arrival the aircraft parked a very long distance from the terminal building. We were bussed to the terminal - this took about 10 minutes. We were then kept on the bus for another 10 minutes before being released into fresh air. The terminal for Air Berlin at Tegel turned out to be a shed with only 4 customs officers for hundreds of non-EU passengers. It took about an hour in a line to clear customs. (EU passengers cleared in minutes due to their automated passport readers.) I am a QANTAS frequent flyer and ended up on Air Berlin because it is a One World partner with QANTAS. How Air Berlin managed to join that partnership of good to excellent airlines is a mystery only the executives of those airlines can answer. I will be complaining to QANTAS and Air Berlin directly. The small number of flight attendants worked very hard and were pleasant but I felt sorry for them.	0
Toronto to Venice. Delayed 1 hour 40 minutes on departure due to technical difficulty. No water offered in that time. Personnel used last 3 rows of seats for themselves and didn't allow people to use them. Food was barely edible for me. Not enough room for knees for average man.	0
Horrible Service! Would have given zero stars if that was an option. Several hours before our flight I received an email informing the flight was delayed 12 hours. When I called Aeromexico to confirm the flight delay, they told me the flight was not delayed and I should go to the airport for the normal scheduled departure. I called twice to confirm and was told to go to the airport. When I arrived at the airport, there were hundreds of people in line for AeroMexico and agents only said to wait in line and gave no information. After an hour in line that never moved, I walked up to the front of the line and demanded to speak to an agent. I was told that the flight was delayed until the next morning. Our flight was rescheduled and delayed several times over the course of 15 hours and we had to sleep at the airport. The final attempt to reschedule our flight was on an overbooked flight and they could not seat us. We were told the only available flights would be many 5 days later! This caused us to miss our entire trip. The counter agent told us to call Aeromexico and maybe the operator could be of service. We called and was on hold for nearly an hour before being given an email address as a source of contact. There is no one to speak with regarding complaints or flight cancellations. The company only communicates via email. Horrible customer service. I wrote an email explaining what had happened. The company responded saying since they offered us a flight, even if it was 5 days later, they would not refund the tickets nor offer a credit! We spent over $1400 on two tickets and they could not even offer a credit.	0
We also were victim of poor management by Aeromexico. After two delays our flight on january 2nd 2019 was canceled leaving us stranded in Puerto Vallarta. This airline doesn't inform passengers, doen't plan ahead and most of all doesn't care about you! Passengers had to inform themselves what was going on. Story most heard was that due to fog in the morning in Mexico City Aeromexico started to book passanger from the first planes that had to leave out of Mexico City over to later flights. That meant that the last flights had to be cancelled. They knew that from the start. Didn't act and let passenger on these last flights hours in stress before telling them at midnight that they could retrieve their bags from the belt and look for shelter. We had a 24 hour delay, had to take a bus to Guadalajara because this stupid action which also caused overbooked flights for the next four days(!). There were no excuses, no compensation whatsoever. Just a reaction that it was due to weather condition (which false, the weathet was perfect that afternoon. My advise: don't ever fly with Aeromexico. If you do, don't complain (and you will be sorry!!).	0
Bogota to Los Angeles via Mexico City. Worst customer service experience in over 30 years of travel! Aeromexico employees in Mexico city are of the utmost unprofessional, ill informed employees I have encountered. From the moment our plane arrived we were misled, disregarded in regards to a connection to LA. We had a conversation to make and had to get our luggage to move forward. We were missing one piece of luggage. I Immediately I went to representatives, showed them my ticket and was told to just wait. This us where the ineptitude and arrogance began. Not only was I misdirected to 3 wrong areas but was just pointed in the general direction of where to go by supervisors of all people! Knowing that we were on the verge of missing a flight at NO fault of our own. I insisted that we be taken by someone Personally and this employee took me to the wrong area as well. NO ONE knows what is going on and above all RUDE about it. Aeromexico is not the airline you want to consider traveling with first and last time with this home of a company!	0
Jeddah to Athens. The seating is economy with the center seat blocked. There is no entertainment system. No coat chef, amenity bag or blanket. There were pillows and newspapers. The single attendant for business class was not available. The window blinds in the cabin were not closed so when the sun rose the cabin was flooded with light. The product is terrible. This is a 3.45 am departure (3hr 30min flight) and there are no services to accommodate night flight passengers. Turkish flies a similar route and is markedly superior product.	0
Dublin to Seattle. Airline refused to check my bag all the way through to Denver and said Air Alaska was not partnered with them. Flight was 2 hours late leaving Dublin. Had no time to get bag and go to Air Alaska and recheck through. After arriving in Denver filed a complaint for last luggage. It’s been 3 days and not a phone call to me from Aer Lingus. All my info address and phone number are on my bag. They will not answer the phone when Air Alaska calls. My travel agent and Air Alaska keep trying to reach them and no response. I have filed a complaint with the airline with a response they will contact my in the next 14 days. I just want my bag returned. I’m very frustrated with the lack of care or response as from the airline.	0
On May 5th, 2019 my husband and I had a flight going from Naples to Dublin, Ireland (with Aer Lingus), then from Dublin to New York JFK airport, NY (Aer Lingus) and then from New York to Tampa with Jetblue. Our flight from Dublin, Ireland to New York (JFK) on May 5th was supposed to take off at 4:20 PM (16:20), however it did not take off until approximately 10:00 PM (22:00). We landed in New York, NY at 11:05 PM (EST.) We were supposed to arrive in New York, NY at 6:55 PM (EST.) When we arrived at the gate in Dublin there were no employees available to speak to. After some time, they announced the flight would be 15 m delayed. Approximately every 1-1.5 hours they continued to push back the time the flight would leave without any explanation. Finally, they announced it was delayed because of technical difficulties. We were also told that we would not be told if we would make it to Tampa that night until we landed in New York, NY.  When we exited the plane, we were given a printed ticket with a time for 9:54 AM the next morning  to arrive in Tampa, FL at 1:00 PM pm May, 6th 2019. We were originally supposed to be in Tampa at 11:18 PM on May 5th, 2019. We were not able to get into the hotel until 1:30 AM including time for waiting for customs, shuttles, and long line at the hotel. The next morning, we arrived 3 hours early at the jetblue gate (on the email it instructed to check in at jetblue and we could not check in online.) While at the Jetblue checkin, the jetblue employee told us that Aer Lingus had not finished completing our booking, and that there was nothing they could do about it. She also told us the flight was almost full, and we may not be able to get on the flight. At this point we were beyond frustrated and upset. We called Aer Lingus and told a representative our problem. She put me on hold for approximately 20-30 minutes. She then said Aer Lingus had not finished the booking and then she finished the booking. We were then able to get our tickets. Our flight to Tampa was also slightly delayed due to fuel issues. We landed in Tampa at 1:30 PM (a total of 14 hours and 10 min after the original arrival scheduled time.) We were given 16 euro worth of vouchers at the airport for food in Dublin. This delay in the flight caused both me and my husband to miss work until 3 PM on Monday. The situation was handled poorly without little information and not booking our tickets.	0
Conclusion: avoid Aer Lingus if you are traveling as a family. They do not respect the value of family and no one is willing to take any responsibility after our horrible experience with them. What happened: We booked a returned flight from/to Toronto to Frankfurt. We were traveling with our 9 month old baby. Right after we booked and paid the tickets, we called the agent to request a baby bassinet and priority seats both ways immediately. We flew from Toronto to Frankfurt with bassinet, no problem. But the agent said we need to make another call before our return flight to reserve the bassinet. 48 hours before our return flight on April 1st, we called the Aer Lingus office in Germany where we would board the flight. They told us they have no access to the seating system and asked us to go to the airport counter for requesting the bassinet. We arrived three and a half hours before the scheduled flight time to check in and to request the bassinet (We were the second in line after the counter was opened). The person on the counter told us, she has no access to the flight from Dublin to Toronto, which is the long flight after our first short flight from Frankfurt to Dublin. She asked us to request the bassinet seat when we transferred at Dublin airport. I asked her, there will only be less than 2 hours transfer time, wouldn't the seats all be taken? What if we do not get a bassinet seat? She said she cannot help and we can only go and find out there. We arrived at Dublin airport, when we went to check in for the second flight, which is going to be 7 and half hours long from Dublin to Toronto. The lady at the counter said there is no bassinet seats anymore and she cannot help us. She told us rudely that there is nothing she can do and we can only go board the plane and ask the cabin crew for the seat change. We boarded the plane EI129, and of course it is full and there was no single crew member who was willing or able to help us at all. We were sitting in the middle seats. Carrying a 9 month old baby at hand. No extra seats or spaces were beside us. And all the crew members were very unfriendly to us. One of them told us it was because there was a last minute cabin change so two families with babies could not get the bassinet seats including us. They even told us: sorry this happened every week I saw many families always left without their requested prioirity seats in the end especially for Sunday and Monday flight. During the whole 7 and a half flight, we did not feel well at all. No one helped us, no one cared about us. Even when my husband was standing beside the hallway to rock the baby and tried to let her sleep because our seats were so tight and small she couldn't nap, one of the crew member came to us and said we cannot stand there. (The seat belt sign was not on at the moment). The baby was crying nonstop because she was so tired but kept getting disturbed by these actions. We asked to speak to the cabin manager three times, and throughout the whole flight not once he came to communicate with us. We felt deeply sad about the unfortunate experience. We contacted Aer Lingus customer service and no one is willing to take responsibility and respond to us.	0
Delhi to New York via Beijing. My experience with Air China was horrible. I won't recommend it to anyone. They are unprofessional, not ready to listen to anyone. They changed my boarding pass to another flight. My transit time became 11 hours from 1.5 hours because of this. Didn't give me lounge at first. There was no food arranged by them. No internet. They owe a responsibility to arrange lounge, food, hotel if they are the one changing anyone's flight. Ground staff wasn't listening to anyone. Now after boarding to this changed flight, I got to know that my meal preference were not mentioned in crew members chart. And because of their unexpected change I missed my following flight. They didn't compensate even for that. At New York airport when I tried to explain it to their staff, he gave me one email address to file complaint. Guess what, that email address was not for complaints. It was for baggage claim. Now I had to call their office many times to get right email address. Meanwhile I was directed from one place to other. When you call their phone number, in normal business hours their automated system says " you are calling outside business hours please call again later." They do not understand English properly. Their services are poor. Won't fly with them ever. Once was enough for me.	0
Auckland to Tokyo via Beijing. This is the worst airline of the modern aviation industry. They just took this whole thing to the next level. Everything was horrible starting from Check-in -> Landing. I request for a special meal due to food allergies, they told me that system does not allow them to put a request and simply hung up on me! Gave me no alternatives. I even sent an email to them but as their services are so poor they did not bother to reply.  When I asked the flight attendant regarding the meal options, she had no idea what lactose allergy is and she does not speak English. She gave me bread rolls with butter for the dinner. The way food was served as if they are doing a banquet dinner and wants to get over it as soon as possible On my way back from Beijing, Air China lost and damaged my bags. I went to the complaint, they brush me off by saying no English, No compensation or resolution. I got told to get things done in Auckland. I called their Auckland office and left a voice message but no one called me back, as usual, they did with the email. Beijing (PEK) Air China staff is extremely rude, heavily lacks communication and customer service skills. On return from Haneda - Japan to Beijing, I missed my flight connecting flight as I had only 70 minutes layover and my first landed when connecting flight check-in gate was closed. That's when Air China lost my bags but when I found them the following day they were damaged too. I got put on a different flight bag home following and my bags did not arrive on the same flight. They arrived the following day. Disappointment after disappointment. Please do not travel on AIR CHINA if you do not want to spoil things such as your mood, money etc. I would not give them any star but the system does not allow.	0
Flight from Montreal to Marseille in June 2019 delayed 2 hrs due to mechanical difficulties. We finally take off & 3 hrs into flight we turn around & return to Montreal because of mechanical difficulties. Sleep in airport for 4 hours. Board again, and delayed for another 2 hrs. Arrive in France 13 hrs late. We were told to keep our hotel receipts so we could be reimbursed. Not only do they refuse to reimburse us, but they won’t even provide name & contact number of a person to speak to - all communications must be done electronically. We went with AC because it was more affordable & between paying for seats & hotel rooms it ended up being significantly more $$.	0
Marseille to Washington via Montreal / Toronto. Flight from Montreal was delayed due to mechanical difficulties. We were forced to wait onboard for hours while they fixed the problem. We missed our connecting flight in Toronto & they had only 3 agents to help hundreds of guests that had missed their connection. We had to spend the night in Toronto & get new flight home the next morning. Air Canada refuses to reimburse for hotel room. Furthermore - there’s no phone number to call to speak to an agent - all communication must be done electronically.  Instead they offered me a voucher for a future flight - I will never fly Air Canada again!!	0
No entertainment. The only entertainment was through a in flight online service which is accessed through your own device. The service was not working for the whole flight. With a one year old child makes a 8 hour flight difficult. Lack of in flight service. To finish it off, they damaged our bag.  I tried to speak to them about it but they gave me a card to contact them on. Now back in the UKand don’t want to call at fear of further cost and their online complaint proceeded not working. So, I’m stuck, with no help.	0
Mexico City to Zacatecas. Booked a flight for my father with Aeromexico and on his connecting flight they cancelled and reassigned his flight 5 times. An 8am flight turned into a 9pm flight, he was stuck in the airport for hours with agents telling him they couldn't help. When I called they promised he would be on a 4:30 flight and still reassigned him 3 more times after that. Absolutely terrible will never book with them again.	0
Horrible customer service. We boarded our flight to Guatemala and my husband has a medical emergency before take off and we were taken off the flight and taken to the hospital. I have been trying to get a confirmation of our flight cancellation for insurance purposes. They say the cannot cancel my flight because they only have my ticket information but not my reservation. Orbitz cannot cancel my flight they say AeroMexico needs to. This is ludicrous! Apparently no one has our reservation but they can see our ticket and that we did not take the flights.	0
I recently made a round trip Montreal to Mexico City. My passport showed two last-names and my plane ticket showed only one last name. For this reason, Aeromexico made such a big fuss and made me buy a new plane ticket. It seems that adding only one last name to the plane ticket was extremely difficult for them since they refused to understand that all they had to do was a minor modification and not a change in the name on the plane ticket. Unlike many other airlines which are supportive and helpful in situations like these, their staff were extremely impolite,  and very unprofessional too. All they want is rip you off and get more money from you. Also, for unknown reasons, I received e-mails from them in which they confirmed two reservations, that I never requested, with different return dates, what an awful mix-up, not only are they rude but also incompetent. I strongly discourage anyone who is planning to fly Aeromexico: poor staff, bad service, terrible food, etc. I have travelled all over the world and this airline is definitely one of the worst. I do not recommend it, Aeromexico never again.	0
Portland to Mexico City., The AeroMexico website boasts about a great deal of wonderful services, on board WIFI, wonderful food, in flight Entertainment and so on. This flight was not anything like that. They continually failed to deliver these amenities. There was no Wifi on any of the four planes I flew on. The Entertainment was impossible to hear over the noise of the engines. They boast about their "Complimentary Tequila". It was so incredibly bad. Special comment should be made about the "food" served on this airline. It should be noted that there is no alternative food or beverage service available for purchase. The food they served was so bad. On the Portland to Mexico City flight we were awakened at 2am by the cabin staff by the cabin staff serving Breakfast. This consisted of a cold and somewhat stale bun, with a paper thin slice of ham and a paper thin slice of cheese. (No condiments - just the dry bread and the ham and cheese), and a child sized serving of apple sauce) On the return flight from Mexico City to Portland, "Dinner' consisted of a 5 ounce cup of badly wilted "greens" which were garnished with a teaspoon of peas (No dressing just bare greens), a bare bun (No butter or other condiment), and about a Cup and a quarter of Rigatoni Pasta. This was garnished with about a teaspoon of unseasoned tomato sauce). The "dessert" was a small plastic tub of Vanilla Pudding-like product. Mexico is the home of Vanilla. This item contained none of that - it reeked of cheap artificial vanilla. Beverages are served in what appeared to be a 4 ounce portion. This included the Coffee and the water served on board. A six hour flight and four ounces of water per passenger. The Aeromexico hub is the Mexico City Airport. Each time, When we boarded the first leg of our flight, we were not told where to find the second leg of the flight. The airport is incredibly poorly marked - and no AeroMexico employee we talked to within the Mexico City airport could tell us where to go to find the second leg of our flight. On our return flight, the Departures Monitor told us that our flight would be leaving from "Gate K". Which is impossible because all of the actual gates at this airport bear numbers and not letters. It took us two hours to get of the first plane and find the second plane. There was not enough time to buy bottled water or any other alternative food. There are some significant issues with this airline.	0
I naively offered $50 more to upgrade when they sent me an offer. A day or so later, I got a message that my offer to upgrade by $840 had been accepted. I got on the phone and email immediately. I wasted six or so hours (when I needed to be getting ready for the trip) trying to straighten out what I at first thought was a misunderstanding. I finally heard from guest services, who apologized for the inconvenience, but said upgrades were not refundable. I wrote back that it wasn't a matter of inconvenience, I couldn't afford the charge. I didn't hear back. I contacted my credit card company to dispute the charges. When I got to the desk in New York, I said I wanted my seat in economy, the one I'd paid for. One clerk was helpful, but a supervisor came and said an upgrade was not refundable. I said, "My credit card company is disputing the charge." He looked at his screen and found me a seat in economy. At first I was grateful, but later felt miffed that I, the customer, had no one's ear, but mentioning the big credit card company finally got someone's attention. At least my return flight would be no hassle, that remained an economy ticket.  Two nights before my departure, I got a note saying I had been upgraded again, for $890 this time. It said, "Do not reply to this note." My phone didn't work in Europe. I sent guest services a note, much less polite this time, ordering them to restore my economy ticket. I didn't hear back. I didn't fly home with Aer Lingus. I missed my connection, and by then believed it was futile to try to get through to that airline, so flew home with another airline. It is a horror trying to get through to them.	0
Copenhagen-Dusseldorf-Miami both ways with my family (wife and three kids). Service on board was not as we expected. Some of the personnel was unfriendly and not very understanding concerning families with kids. There was a delay on our way from Miami to Dusseldorf were we sat for 3 hours in the plane and the only thing that they offered was a protein bar. Food on the plane was not so good and we had to buy some snacks to the kids. The entertainment system on the longer flight of 11 hours was not working well and there were no helps from the personnel or alternatives. The delayed flight home had us miss the connection flight and we had to wait for 12 hours in the airport since the company did not use the 10-11 hours we were in the air to try and find alternatives for passengers with connection flights. The ground personnel said they only knew it 10 minutes before we landed in Dusseldorf. This is according to my view not a professional way of running a customer focused company. We will never travel with Air Berlin again.	0
Started off great with Air Canada from Winnipeg to Toronto. Very accommodating and everything was on time. My connecting flight from Toronto to Deer Lake was not at all like that. It was delayed by mechanical issues which was fine, then they asked people to check their carry-ons because there was an overcrowded plane. We then boarded and had seating issues with not having enough seats for people. After all that was figured out, they “misplaced” cargo (a dog) and were still loading our original luggage two hours after our flight was supposed to leave. Should they not have seats and luggage figured out before hand? It was an overcrowded, unorganized mess and I would not recommend flying with Air Canada Rouge until they get things figured out.	0
Calgary to Las Vegas. Seats are small. They realized 10 min before boarding that their flight was oversold and were trying to move passengers to next flight and in this commotion they delayed the boarding and then because of bad weather we got stuck for another hour. Even after weather cleared they were the last airline to realize time to load bags? Honestly pay the difference and take a better flight.	0
I flew Aeroflot from LAX to and from Moscow. I brought 2 luggage to the airport counter knowing that as a Sky Team Premium member, I would be able to check in one additional luggage on top of one allowed luggage. According to the counter attendant, since Aeroflot system shows that I am not a Premium Member, I could not check in additional luggage. Even though I presented with the Korean Air Premium Membership card they flatly denied to check in the luggage. I went to Korean Air Counter and brought the manager to Aeroflot counter then Aeroflot demanded some kind of printout of my membership, then they allowed. It took more than 2 hours to check in. When I tried to check in at Moscow, same thing was repeating all over. However, this time I did not have Korean Air to back me up! Staff were rude and condescending. Again, it took more than 2 hours to check additional luggage! I do not know how to prevent the same trouble in my future travel.	0
At baggage drop I queued for 45 mins to check in my luggage. I had a small backpack and a cabin suitcase that were for hand carrying but they told me they could only allow one so I was forced to check in my cabin cases and pay for extra luggage. I didn't get to take valuables out because it was 40 mins before the departure time and I had to hurry to the gate. The flight from Venice to Moscow was delayed for around 30 minutes. Luckily I got to my connecting flight just in time. However, the flight from Moscow to Hong Kong was delayed as well for 1 hour. Luckily the plane still arrived in Hong Kong in time. I was happy when I stepped out from the cabin, but later only to find out that I couldn't see my luggage at the baggage claim. I went to the counter to look for help but they told me they didn't receive any notifications from Aeroflot about baggage misconnection and they couldn't even locate my luggage. The staff told me they were not from the airline so they couldn't help much and that they would send me back the luggage when they found it. I told them to send the luggage to a friend's place because my family was not in Hong Kong to receive the luggage for me. I bought some winter wears and basic necessities before heading to China on the same day and kept all the required documents to send to the lost and claims department of the airline. However, they refused to pay me back the expenses considering I had been in Europe for 2 months with all my belongings only because I am from Hong Kong. When I picked up my luggage from my friend, I found out that my hand luggage was opened by someone else. I would not fly this airline company again.	0
Reynosa to Mexico City. I flew with Aeromexico for the first and it was the worst experience ever. We went from Miami to Mexico City and it was fine but from there our flight to Reynosa was delayed so we booked another one. When we booked another we didn’t receive any sort of receipt or proof of flight so we went to check what departures are leaving soon and the flight that we apparently booked was until 3 days later and we had plans so we couldn’t wait. We took an autobus from Mexico City to Reynosa and it took 15 hours. Now that we are there we do everything we wanted to and our flight back was the worst. We had flights from Reynosa to Mexico City and from Mexico City to Miami. We weren’t allowed to board the plane because we didn’t verify that we were actually in Reynosa since we never took the flight, they used the excuse that they sold our tickets and we couldn’t do anything about. So the next day we went back and everything was fine and we got home. Never flying with Aeromexico again, worst experience, next time I’m taking American Airlines.	0
Houston to Mazatlán via Mexico City. Please read before you book any flight with Aeromexico! They have awful customer service when mishaps happen! My family and I traveled with them a few weeks ago and I will never travel with them again. Flight to Mexico was great. Flight coming back was a nightmare. They delayed our flight for no real reason (weather was perfect, plane was there and fine ... we asked multiple people and nobody had an answer). We then waiting on the tarmac for 1/2 hour .... right in front of an open gate. No reason. Because of these errors on their  part, we missed our connecting flight in Mexico City. Customer service was awful. I’ve never been treating so poorly and it was their fault we were in this inconvenient situation. Their best flight they could do for us was the next day - 20 hours out. We asked about different airlines, different airports to fly into, or at least accommodation for our family (a baby and 2 other small children) to go to. They just kept shaking their head no. It was horrible,  and we had no choice but to take our exhausted babies to a hotel and feed them and let them rest for the night. All hotels within a 1/2 hour hour radius are well over $300. And we were not even close to being the only ones who missed flights due to their errors and their claims they had nothing until the following day (even tho this was at noon). It made me wonder if they were in on it with the hotels and purposely doing this to their customers. They made us miss obligations back home, they turned a hard 6 hour travel day with little kids into a 26 hour travel day, and we are out over $400 for their short comings and inconvenience they brought onto us. And they refuse to reimburse or try to make any of it up to us. They are just awful!	0
Larnaca to Tel Aviv. This is the second time I was to fly Aegean Airlines. This time I bought tickets to fly in August 2018 in high price for comfortable flying hours since I am flying with young children. I found out the company cancel our flight and listing us to the uncomfortable flight time with no compensation.  I will not fly Aegean Airlines again.	0
Edinburgh to Miami via Dublin. Had our tickets changed twice at short notice ending up with a whole day sitting in Dublin Airport with young children. No apology, just get on with it. Try emailing guest relations which is a joke as they are simply not bothered, I presume due to the extremely high number of complaints. Yes its cheap but without a doubt at a high price when it comes to service.	0
I flew from Milan to Berlin round-trip and have to say that after several bad experiences with Air Berlin this time they were over the point. I booked the flight from Malpensa to Tegel and some weeks later they changed the airport from Malpensa to Linate which is further from where I live. This was just the beginning. On the flight back from Tegel to Linate although I was at the check in desk on time (70 mins in advance) they told me that I could not fly because the flight was overbooked! This was the evening flight and they offered me the chance to fly the next morning instead. They offered me another alternative to fly to Linate via Dusseldorf. So I went back to the Air Berlin desk where they gave me a new boarding pass. After finally arriving at Linate 3 hours later than initially planned what completed the disaster is that my luggage did not arrive. Never again.	0
We booked from Sydney to Frankfurt via Beijing for $1000 round trip via an online travel website. Awesome! Cheap price. A couple of months later, we decided to change our departure and return dates. Knowing that there would be penalties, we called the Air China call center and we were happy to hear that it would cost about $150 per person to make the change. We called 5 days later to apply the change and to our surprise, the total price to is now $630 per person. After many questions with the support center representative who barely spoke English, we found that we were given the wrong information on the first call. We asked to speak with the supervisor: he/she doesn't speak English! Really?? You are in the aviation industry and you don't speak English? We decided to verify with the travel website: They were going to charge $780! We had 2 choices: 1. Cancel the ticket to get $500 refund and buy another ticket at $1000 (and lose $500 per person) OR 2. Just change the tickets at $630 per person with Air China. Even though it is more expensive, we decided to avoid the hassle and go with the second option. Air China asked us for our passport numbers because their system would not allow them to make any changes without it. How is it possible that we bought the tickets online WITHOUT the passport numbers. They would not accept any other form of identification (no driver license, no national ID, no credit card matching the name of the passenger). This is our first experience with Air China and we haven't even boarded the plane. This is our last experience with Air China because we refuse to board this or any of their planes.  Do not book with Air China!! I hope this will help someone in the future in avoiding the issues we had to deal with even before boarding the plane.	0
Singapore to Seoul via Beijing. Brought a round trip with my family, missed the flight and whole trip including return trip is wasted (was told to cancel return trips and rebook again as they don't allow to change from return to single trip.)	0
Manchester to Toronto. I have never before come across a trans Atlantic flight with no onboard entertainment. No wonder what with the plane being so old. No-one seemed to be bothered that the flight was 2 hours late and that many passengers were going to miss their connections. A simple apology would have sufficed. Never again will I fly Air Canada.	0
Stockholm to Moscow with Aeroflot, and the ground service seemed okay at first, but made an error regarding our luggage even though we asked specifically about it so we had to spend some time fixing that later with a different airline. Flight attendants stood around bickering about something during the flight so I couldn't sleep. Plane was delayed several hours, airline would not help us with our connecting flight (which we missed). We had to book a hotel room since next flight was a day later. Airline won't confirm that they were delayed, so paper work with getting reimbursement for the hotel room from job isn't working either. It's not even Aeroflot that has to pay for it - they just have to confirm that they were in fact late but they won't do it! Only upside is that the food was okay. 	0
Mexico City to Tijuana. I was singled out and told to comply, never given a real reason other than my carry on wouldn't fit in the plane compartment and that it needed to be checked. I measured my bag and it fit just fine, like it had on so many past flights. So I refused to check it. When I raised my voice I was reprimanded by an aggressive and intimidating male employee who told me that I should not speak to a woman that way. I was singled out of a long line of people who had not yet boarded. I was told that there was not enough room on board for my carry on. A lie. There were at least 23 vacant seats as well once I boarded with my luggage that I refused to check. I had a laptop and some delicate art unframed that I had purchased in Ecuador that I had no intentions of checking with baggage.	0
Athens to Bucharest. Waiting in the bus (15-20min) to get to the plane, the flight was less than half full and they wanted to wait for all passengers in order to use only 1 bus. They had the old inflight magazine. Recently Aegean changed their policy and started charging seat selection up to row 14.  As a result, the second half of the plane was packed and the front was empty. Crew did not allow passengers to move to front seats. Snacks must be the worst ever.	0
London to Athens. I was at Heathrow and I had a carry-on baggage well below the required dimensions. Many people with bigger baggage were boarding without weighing them but then a rude gate agent weighed mine and found it heavier by 1kg and demanded in a very bad way to either pay a huge surcharge or be left at the airport! I found that unreasonable but I proposed to take out something if that was the case. They did not let me do that and strictly asked for my credit card to charge me or else deny me boarding the aircraft. I regret my choice to fly for the first time with Aegean. I will never fly with them again and the same will also happen with many other passengers of that flight that have been disturbed by the unacceptable behavior and offensive attitude.	0
Abu Dhabi to Berlin what a horror joined a long line which snaked out of the door into the duty free area the long line was caused by lack of security screening facilities. Once past security people are compressed into a small area whilst buses transfer you to the aircraft another painfully slow process. Once on board you get to witness some of the worse leg room in economy in the industry. It the took 1 hour to taxi out to take off unbelievable at 0200 in the morning get with the picture Abu Dhabi airport. Once airborne crew come through the aircraft in the dark to serve substandard food. Disembarking in Berlin passport control is at the end of the aerobridge so the line goes back towards the aircraft door and if your a non EU passport holder you can't even get to the line for that counter as the majority EU residents are blocking the path. Once through that process you wait in a small luggage claim area for your bags to eventually arrive! What a horrible experience from start to finish.	0
This has to be the worst service/food/treatment I've ever experienced. First off the food was terrible. I couldn't even eat any of it and it seems that was a common thing for the people around me. But the staff do not know how to speak English. They know key phrases and a few words but god forbid you have a problem because you wont receive any help because they wont understand you. If you loose your luggage, your flight is canceled, there are any changes they wont be able to explain anything or help you in anyway. This airline is cheaper for a reason and I highly recommend going with a different company because if you have any problems or questions you're in trouble. My flight to JFK was canceled and then the staff were actually yelling at me just saying "you wait 10 hours!". No explanation, no we're sorry, just yelling in Chinese and finger pointing. Don't get me wrong, you'll get to the place a little late but in one piece. But just expect to be treated like an animal.	0
No Customer Service Available for Emergencies. One day before we were set to fly back my husband had a scuba diving accident resulting in severe decompression sickness. The doctor said that he could die if he flew. I called Aeromexico to let them know we could not fly on our set day. When I called back to reschedule. They said that we could not reschedule without incurring penalty and extra costs unless we went through Customer Service. Guess what? Customer Service does not have a phone number. You can only contact through email and the wait time is 10-15 days for a response. When my husband was well enough to fly, we had to return to the US for treatment about 6 days after his accident. I booked Aeromexico tickets that cost about $900 one way. I figured we could work it out with Aeromexico when we returned home. However, Aeromexico refused to refund either our original tickets we purchased or the replacement tickets, even when we provided documentation of the accident and a letter from the doctor saying it was impossible for my husband to fly. I strongly suggest using an alternate airline. I have flown al over the world and have never encountered an airline with poorer customer service or a more heartless non-cancellation policy.	0
Vancouver to Lima via Mexico. Stone cold bagel is not an adequate meal for a 6 hour flight in business class. Dedicated check in counters? No, never heard of it. Online check-in? What's that? Priority luggage handling - doesn't exist. Access to lounges in Lima and Mexico (that belong to SkyTeam, separate complaint) - no, I have to pay. Despite the SkyTeam rules, clearly stated on the website (false advertising when it comes to Aeromexico). Crew doesn't speak English on international routes. Transiting in Mexico city - beyond disastrous. I almost missed my connection. Airport is a mess, no signage, nobody speaks English. I had to clear the customs and border control, and then run around looking for my gate, just to pass another security control (which was useless and ridiculous). Cabin crew on YVR-MEX route was atrocious. Service non-existent. Aircraft was dirty, passengers were seated in business class just because they knew someone or spoke Spanish. All four legs of my flight had completely different "service standards", with LIM - MEX being the only one with remotely acceptable in-flight service.	0
Aer Lingus staff in the airport refused to help me in any way. I missed a connection booked by Aer Lingus due to delay of previous Alaska Airlines connecting flight. I was redirected by another airline through Chicago, London (with 8 hour unwanted layover) then Belfast. It took me 46 hours to complete the trip and my luggage took 80 hours to arrive. I submitted complaint form to Aer Lingus and as yet have had no response. I have made numerous attempts to contact them via Facebook page and once again have received no help. The journey cost me over £300 in additional expenses. No mention of compensation or acknowledgment of my complaint. I did not actually manage to even get on an Aer Lingus flight at all and can therefore not give them any rating for service.	0
Dublin to Newark. Nightmare flights to and from Ireland this Christmas. Being disabled with and severe limited mobility, bulkhead seats that I booked and selected online were denied on both flights. For the outbound, I was told there was a aircraft change and so the seats were to bumped to middle of row in front of the bulkhead, with no recline. I made sure to call Aer Lingus twice during my stay to ensure we had the correct seating for the return journey. Both times we were guaranteed that our seats were correct and it also reflected “extra legroom” in the Aer Lingus App. On our return flight, I decided to check with the gate agent on our seating. He started off by stating that is illegal for someone like me to sit in those seats and said authorities may have to be called. I tried to correct him by say that these were bulkhead seats and not an exit row. He stated that disabled folks have no extra rights on a plane and that babies will always come first. I was stunned at this. Then comes the boarding and not once were people with mobility issues invited to preboard. So we were again seated in middle seating.	0
Economy on ZRH-DUS and DUS-AUH. The planes were new but considering this is a European airline why did they design the seats with so little legroom? Everyone suffered when the the person in front started to recline seats. Limited choice on inflight entertainment. The experience on both flights were horrible and we would never want to fly with this airline again. Avoid this airline at all cost.	0
I am a 1.8 million miler with Delta and have flown millions of miles with almost every Airline in the world in Economy Business and First Class. We recently paid $10000 for two Business Class Tickets from LAX to Dusseldorf with Air Berlin because we wanted to fly on the same air line as family members returning form a visit - never again Air Berlin. It took more than combined 14+ hrs on hold on the phone to confirm our flights. They never answers our various email complaint forms I filled out. Their business class seats are small just like Comfort Economy seat  even so the decline to a full bed but you may fall out when you turn around. Food is average and overall service ranges form very bad to average. Never again.	0
San Francisco to Manila via Beijing. I will never book my parents here again, due to their very poor service. My parents, 86 and 83, traveling from San Francisco to Manila with only a one hour layover at Beijing were left behind by the aircraft, this shouldn’t be a problem due to the fact that they were wheel chair assisted. Air China didn’t even bother trying to inform us. I tried calling their customer service but I waited for almost 2 hours. I understand the volume of callers, but 2 hours is more than enough to wait.his entire incident made everyone in my family worried having no contact of my parents and most importantly, of their current situation. At Beijing, although they were given hotel accommodation, they were never offered even a snack / meal. What added to the turmoil was that the flight supposedly from Beijing straight to Manila, was changed to Beijing, Japan, and Manila. Again for the second time, not a single word was heard from the airline.	0
Myself and 2 coworkers had to pay twice for a flight to Orlando and still havent received any compensation for tickets or the expenses of the delay. They lost our luggage for 3 days and refuse to cover any expenses from this.I was flying from Vancouver to Toronto for business and our connecting flight to Orlando in Toronto was delayed (not Air Canada's fault, but an airport issue). For almost 4 hours in the airport, Air Canada employees at the airport and via phone refused to speak to anyone on the delayed flights about what they should do.  We finally re-booked our flights for early the next morning and booked a hotel for the evening. When we woke up, Air Canada at around 1:00 AM rebooked our original flight to 6:00am - of course we didnt see this email so late at night so we foregoed that flight and went with the 8:30 we had already rebooked. Of course, we tried calling Air Canada to inform them of the switch but still no one was answering their phones. Our 8:30 was rescheduled to 12:00 and when we were able to leave, we asked our flight check-in attendant to scan our bag ticket to make sure our bags were on the correct plane, she assured us they most definitely were. No luggage once we arrive in Orlando. It took us three days to finally receive our luggage, all the while being treated incredibly poorly by rude and incompetent employees who took no responsibility for the inconvenience. We still haven't been refunded for anything, and all staff we deal with says there is nothing they can do.	0
Barcelona to Toronto. This was the most uncomfortable plane with the worst service and horrible food. No inflight entertainment screen provided. The flight attendants seemed irritated. Get it together, Air Canada. Step up the game a bit. At least clean the plane better between flights.	0
Grenada to Toronto. Upon boarding at Grenada they announced on the plane that there was a weight issue and they were "reloading the luggage for proper weight distribution". Upon arriving in Toronto we found out that meant they decided to leave our luggage behind and not tell us. Still no word on where our valuables are or when they will be returning. I understand that the plane needs to be in line with weight restrictions but inform your guests, offer the cost of the flight back or at least a discount.  The worst part is that they have failed to guarantee its return. At this point it may as well be lost luggage. In this case those pieces of luggage that are now unattended in grenada should be of the highest priority to return home, yet all agents we talk to seem incredibly unphased by this. Also after waiting at the carousel for an hour and finally going to customer service they nonchalantly told us it was left behind. No apology was given.  Also the aircraft is dated. No entertainment, tighter seating than any i have experienced before. Staff were rude and snappy.I will never fly air canada rouge or air canada in general again and will make sure to tell everyone i know about this experience.  Instead of coming home relaxed and happy we have had to spend hours of every day back since waiting for updates.	0
We were on a 10 hour flight from Bangkok to Moscow (connecting to Barcelona) which took off on time, but we somehow lost 1.5 hours in the air. Then about 20 of us missed our various connections by about 10 mins.  We then were told we'd have to stay overnight in a hotel. We waited around for 45+ minutes with no information or wifi to tell loved ones not to pick us up in Barcelona. We were finally escorted to a hotel with security guards and strict surveillance. We weren't allowed to leave the second floor without an escort. On top of that, everyone was rude and cold and only one man spoke English. The security guards spoke none, except for the one who could yell "go." The worst part is that they all made us share a room with a complete stranger even though several passengers tried to refuse. We also weren't allowed to have our checked luggage, so we had to sleep in a room with a stranger with next to nothing. We were then escorted to our flight the next morning though none of them spoke English and were incredibly rude and short. At passport control, I was screamed at in Russian for not showing my hotel voucher, of which no one ever told us to keep or show to anyone after the hotel. Finally another passenger translated for us and I was able to get through. The flight attendants also spoke minimal English and were far from kind. The entire experience was awful with no reprieve.	0
Geneva to Tokyo via Moscow with Aeroflot. My flight from Geneva to Moscow was 1.5 hours late, when I had 1.5 hours transit in Moscow, meaning I landed when my connecting flight was about to take off. I knew about the very short transit, therefore consulted the cabin attendant when I found out that the flight was delayed. To which I was told the connecting flight would wait for me and I would be guided to business class just before landing so that I could get off the flight early, in which case the transit would be smooth, and there will be ground staff assisting me the transit. All points was a total lie! They could have, and I do have experience with other flights that the departure time is delayed by 30 minutes or so for connecting passengers, however no such arrangement was made. Neither did they allow me to go to the front of the plane. Rather, I was moved twice to the rear end of the plane due to families wanting to sit together. On top of this, none of the ground crew were there to help me at all. Because of this, I was forced into staying 24 hours in Moscow in a hotel arranged by Aeroflot. But this is the crazy part. You stay in an airport hotel in a "special" floor where there are security guards so you cannot leave the hotel. You cannot even go to the common area of the hotel without a security guard behind your back. Basically, you are treated as a prisoner! 	0
This was my second time on AB after a short flight to Crete in 1997. To make a long story short - the 2 biggest issues were: The narrow space between the seats Ryanair has more space! That would be OK on a 2-3 hours flight but not 12 hours (TXL-AUH-HKT and back). Terrible. I am 1.88m and did not know how to sit. Customer service: I do not know if the flight attendants earn enough or have zero training because they have no idea about customer service. At the end of the day I do not care - I want the best service for my money and I have to say that I have never - and I have been to almost 80 countries - experienced such unprofessional often rude stewards. Two examples: I ordered special meals and on 2 of the 4 flights there were problems with it and the AB staff screamed the information about my special meal throughout the cabin. I went to the kitchen for a second beer. The lady gave me a lecture in a very rude undertone that the supplies have to suffice for the return flight from HKT to AUH as well. All this and more has never happened to me before. The result for me is: AB and AUH never ever again. AUH is a mess too - everything is totally unorganised and everything works like on a bazaar. I know DXB and DOH as well. DXB and EK are the best and I love to use them.	0
New York JFK to Beijing. On 25-NOV-2018, our flight got cancelled causing me and my group to miss a whole day of vacation in Thailand. The Airline did absolutely zero for us over 300$ in loss per person. Unacceptable. Our flight was at 2:30am and delayed until 12:30pm following day. We called the airline they had no information. We received no email what so ever notifying us of cancellation/delay. We sat at the airport for almost 10 hours with no direction from anyone. When we called again to ask for hotel accommodation (per airline policy of delay of 4+ hours) we were told we do not need a hotel. We have a member in my group with health issues, however, when mentioned to Customer Service they immediately dismissed this. At this point in time due to absolute negligence on behalf of this airline, we will never fly with them again.  Don't be deceived by the cheap price. The cheap price reflects in their sub par customer service which was evidently and successfully displayed by Air China personnel. They were rude and offensive.	0
San Francisco to Beijing. Our booking leaving from San Francisco was a total nightmare. We got to the counter to check in at 12:50 an hour before the departure time and there’s nobody there to check us in. Therefore we cannot get to the gate. We were there exactly an hour before departure which is still on the required time to check in for the flight. The counter personnel’s left their post prior to the time. Called the extension on the gate to get help but again personnel don’t answer their phone. We had called the 800 number of the airline which takes 2 hours to answer and no help was rendered to us by your company. The 3rd party agency tried the whole night to book us another trip using the remaining booking so we don’t purchase another ticket but Air China refused to help us. Instead they wants us to buy a more expensive ticket and charge us ton of money to get to our destination. The aggravation and frustration was unbearable. No one attempted to help. Besides we bit the bullet to just purchase a ticket but the process is long and complicated on hold for the reservation office for 2 hours and yet never get to reserve it.	0
San Francisco to Manila via Beijing. My connecting flight from Beijing to Manila on Oct 31, 2018, took off without notice. I was one of those passengers stranded in Beijing starving and cold. The money that was given to me is not enough to pay for the hotel room. I spent more than 12 hours in the airport I've missed a very important appointment the next day and it cost me handsomely. It was a very frustrating and exhausting flight and a very poor customer service.	0
Taipei to Beijing via Houston, we looked for a ticket not expensive and comfortable as we were traveling as a family with a 3 yrs old kid. I found that Air China was offering cheap ticket and transfer hotel accommodation at Beijing if your transfer time is over 7 hrs. Beijing is really cold in November at night even for adults, imagine the kids. We arrived Beijing at 00:30 for transfer and waited 1 hr in line for security check with a kid sleeping in my arms. Asked officers for priority line but none of them cared about us!! For transfer hotel you have to apply transfer visa which is an easy process i experienced before however this time the lady officer even without checking our passports carelessly and without expressing not even a little responsibility said I will not give you visa! Then i went to Air China desk, but they didnt even try a bit to help, we paid ourselves for hourly hotel to at least let baby sleep in warm. I never ever recommend Air China.	0
Mexico City to Toronto. I like travelling with Air Canada, but rouge is a stain to their name. No inflight screens on board, even for long flights, poor choice of food, Bad seating. I paid for a meal in my return flight that they didn’t even have on board. Only snacks. A 90 mins delay in flight, missed the connection. They couldn’t give me a flight until 9 hours later.	0
Montreal to Providenciales. Expected a lot more from Air Canada. Rouge aircraft is simply an assault on a person's personal space. I am 5'11" and I cannot sit in the seat unless my legs are wide open. Cramped and appallingly is how I would rate this seating configuration. This is the last time I travel with this carrier. Even if it is more expensive I will travel on another airline just to have the decency of legroom. Pathetic Air Canada, simply greedy and pathetic.	0
Aeromexico personnel at the airport are rude and incompetent, they feel that we are begging for a favor when we are the ones paying their salary, if you ever need a flight think twice before choosing Aeromexico. My kids arrived to the wrong gate, for thus reason they arrived 1 hr before their flight to the correct gate, they told the attendants their flight was soon to depart but they didn't do anything and had them wait in line which was going to depart at a later time. By the time they got to the counter it was late and they lost their flight, customer service couldn't do anything for us. We will try not to use this airline again.	0
Mexico City to Houston. The connecting flight from Mexico City, Aeromexico/Delta gave me & my fiancé a really bad experience. They did not assign gate numbers for their flights initially and when we asked staff around us for our gate number they kept giving us the incorrect one causing us to miss our first flight at 3 and had to have it changed to 8. So we sat in the airport for 12 hours because of misinformed staff. We spoke to a manager for Aeromexico who was very rude and snappy and kept telling us that we should have been at the right gate even when we explained to her that the rep gave us the wrong gate number. She didn’t care what we had to say and just told us that it would be $400 to change flights. Something told us to speak to another Supervisor and their happened to be a man who politely listened to us and understood that we did not intentionally miss our flight because of the misunderstandings and as a courtesy he had our flight changed. Downside was that the next flight was not until 8pm so we sat in the airport for 8 hours. Will not be flying through this company again.	0
San Luis to Tijuana via Mexico City. Aeromexico cancelled my reservation without any phone call, email, or text message. When I asked why or how this could have happened they had no explanation other than I should go to an airport and show my ID and card. Which I did, immediately but did not do any good. I had to re-buy the tickets but this time for $300 more than when I made the purchase 12 hours earlier. They have no live customer service that deals with billing issue, they have only an email team that didnt see anything wrong with what they did. I wonder how many other people they cancel on just to re-sell at a higher price.	0
Bogota to Seattle via Mexico City. I purchased a ticket for my brother so he could come to the USA. I used my credit card to purchase the ticket. The next day I received an email from AeroMexico saying that I had to drive 2 hours to the airport to show them my identification. I contacted my credit card and was informed that they had approved the transaction. Turns out AeroMexico has a third party system that randomly flags charges and denies them and there is no way to override it. This is obviously a company from a developing country as this would never happen in a US company.	0
Aegean Airlines have updated their charges for sporting equipment, skis in particular. The first set of skis used to be free with the purchased ticket, but from now on it costs 50 euros per trip. I consider these charges ridiculous, this is something I would expect from Ryanair or a similar low budget airline.	0
Amsterdam to Hartford via Dublin. Flying business class and they lost my suitcase. Claiming your suitcase and contacting the missing baggage department is handled somewhere in India (call center). Total not capable people who answering like robots. Compensation, never heard of and irritation to the top on my side. Cheap, amateurish and no service at all when you want to find out where your suitcase is when you call, sent mails etc. I want to have compensation for my ruined one week stay in the USA.	0
New York to Hong Kong via Beijing. Disgraceful service and attitude. Avoid this airline. Flight: 13 Oct 2:30am, JFK-Hong Kong, CA990. Due to unexpected transport problems (incredibly, NY JFK's Airtrain system broke down, leaving us stranded onboard), I arrived at the Air China check-in desk exactly one hour before the flight. However, the staff had already closed the check-in desk (there was literally just one person left, closing down computers etc) and they would not let me check-in. The rules state check-in closes one hour before the flight, but the Air China staff had clearly closed the counter before that cut-off time. There were around 20 passengers left stranded due to being stranded on the airport's airtrain shuttle, but Air China made no attempt to help. In fact, the staff were completely indifferent. Air China refused to refund the money and would only allow us on a later flight if we paid the fare difference in full - which was several thousand dollars. I had to cancel my trip. I advise you never to buy tickets with Air China. If everything goes as planned you might be fine but if there are any unexpected problems, Air China has no interest in helping and will be completely inflexible. Choose a better airline that Air China, one with reasonable customer service, one that solves problems rather than simply waving away passengers in need.	0
Lisbon to Tampa via Toronto. Never again. Air Canada Rouge is possibly the worst airline I have every flown. I checked my bag in Lisbon to be told there was a fee which I paid. I asked if my bag could be checked to Tampa - no. I had to pick up my bag in Toronto and recheck it for my flight to Tampa. I had to pay a 2nd baggage fee. My bag cost $120 dollars to fly on the same booking. The aircraft was very old and uncomfortable, very dirty, with no in-flight entertainment. You have to download their app which didn't work. They had devices to rent but ran out about the 3rd row from the top. Food was disgusting and I found the cabin crew to be unhelpful, rude and very badly mannered. Fly with any other airline if you have a choice.	0
Fort Lauderdale to Toronto. Rouge flights in economy - seats, space and service are awful! On April 7, I was rescheduled from a super 8 aircraft and was put on a rouge flight. So cramped that, at barely five feet tall, my knees touched the seat ahead - no room to put a small bag under the seat. The staff were rude when I asked for help to put my bag in the bin above. Today I am travelling again. I had no choice with the airline, but used points for an upgrade. This time in rouge business- I expect the same lousy seats and service. Air Canada prmised lower priced service with rouge - reduced costs considerably but never adjusted the price. It is as costly as a regular Air Canada flight.	0
I reserved and paid for a Premium Economy seat about 4 months before the flight. The night before I was to fly I called Aeroflot to reconfirm, and was told that she couldn't confirm my reservation and that I would have to check in with the NY Aeroflot office when it opened at 9AM the next morning. The flight was scheduled to leave at 11:50 AM. No explanation, no apology, no nothing. Fortunately the agency that had made the original reservation has a 24/7 help line, and the agent I spoke to there was able to discover that the plane I was booked to fly on had no seating configuration for Premium Economy. The only seating choices were Economy or Business - this from the airline that had accepted a reservation and payment for a Premium Economy seat 4 months before. I have no problem with airlines having to change equipment, but I think it's fair to expect them to notify affected passengers about changes in the seating configuration. If I hadn't called, Aeroflot would have sprung this on me at the airport, when my only choices would have been to accept the downgrade to Economy or upgrade to Business for an additional $3K+. Instead I cancelled the reservation and rebooked Economy on Finnair, where at JFK I was able to purchase a Premium Economy upgrade on one segment for 60 Euros, and where I got a free upgrade to Business Class on another. I booked Aeroflot originally because I had heard that they had substantially improved their inflight services, and perhaps that it still true. Since I never got on the flight, I wouldn't know. And I never will; because of their unbelievably incompetent reservation services, I'll never try to fly them again.	0
Vancouver to Havana via Mexico city. I was late 15 mins for check-in and there was at least 40 min. for me to go for boarding and people in the office said I was too late and didn't want to help. When i called customer service they said they need to charge no show up fee, Fare difference and another penalty so the total was like 600 CAD for the next flight. But new flight ticket was almost the same price. All I asked was at least the cancellation of no show up fee or the refund but they said it is non refundable. I asked if i could use the return but again I was told no. So they made me pay the whole ticket price.	0
Mexico City to Toronto. Aeromexico is a mess. Oversold flights, departure delays. They charge even if is their error. Hidden cost and a total lack of care of their customers. I’m a Sky Priority at Aeromexico, I cant choose any other airline to fly inside Mexico. So i know really well that Aeromexico is a dishonest airline.	0
Guadalajara to Sacramento. This is our 2nd time flying Aeromexico. Last year was a complete disaster with the flight that was supposed to leave SMF 2315 and land in GDL 0515, instead leaving SMF st 0530! The entire nite we were given zero info/updates and only once offered a drink. The shops were closed, and my husband, is a diabetic controlled by diet so needs to est every 2 hours when awake. No employee would help us. Our return trip last year was 3 hours late. I am usually a glass half full type of person, so when this years annual trip to visit family was being planned I decided to give Aeromexico another chance. The dates/times/prices were the most convenient so we decided to give it another try. We never entered a complaint last year. This year our trip to GDL was uneventful. But the return trip we encountered the ticket agent from hell. We were never notified that the weight per luggage piece had been changed, and the carry on that should have been free, was 2 kilos overweight. Under then new guidelines, our 2 large luggage pieces were a combined 10 kilos underweight. We usually pay $25 each for the large luggage. At the GDL terminal u go thru the first line, then are given a piece of paper, have to go to a 2nd area, wait in line to pay for ur luggage, then return to the first line provide ur receipt and get ur ticket, not very convenient or fast) nothing was said by the ticket agent about overweight luggage, but when I went to pay I found I was going to be charged $114 for the carry on, which was 2 kilos over by the new guidelines. I pointed out that our total was still 8 kilos under, and that we were never notified of revised guidelines to no avail. I refused to pay, saying I would rather move 2 kilos to another suitcase. I was told to return to original ticket person and that he would return our luggage so we could make the changes. When i returned and told him what I wished to do, he put all 3 pieces of luggage on the conveyor where it automatically rolled to the back, gave us a paper with UPC codes, and told us we could get our luggage back "down the hall". I asked him numerous times where down the hall and he refused to say more. We looked "down the hall" to no avail, and no other Aeromexico employee were helpful. We finally asked a Volaris employee who walked us to an area that we would never have found. It took almost an hour to get the luggage returned. We adjusted the weight, and then had to wait in the LONG ticket line starting the entire process all over. It's a good thing we always arrive early for our flights! When we got to ticket counter again, the carry on was .03 over. The ticket agent was prepared to start the whole have to pay for this deal again. I pointed out that the total was still 8 kilos under and her response was "and what does that have to do with anything? " I quickly removed 1 pair of socks which put it at 9.90 kilos, under the magic 10 kilos. We have continually encountered employees for Aeromexico that are rude, unhelpful, and basically convey a could-care-less attitude. The only time Aeromexico seems to shine is when you are actually on the plane. The stewards are great. Excluding a very rough landing at SMF (bounced several times before finally staying down) the in air experience is great! Unfortunately that does not compensate enough for the issues you deal with while on the ground. Obviously last year was not  a flux, we will not fly Aeromexico again!!!	0
Dublin to Gatwick. I have a shoulder injury and find it difficult to put even a lightweight bag up into the overhead locker. I asked a young male cabin crew member to assist me and he refused. Furthermore he told be he had a back problems which I am surprised he shared and in an "I dont want to help you" way. I responded - Ok I will wait for assistance and he just walked away. Another passenger when asked kindly helped me. I was shocked at his attitude to customer service and lack of concern or interest. I will not be choosing this airline again.	0
New York to Mumbai via Beijing. The food provided on-board is not up to the mark specially for long routes.I had Experienced the worst part from New York when the air China Airport authority is not sure whether we will get our connecting flight and the have to put the baggage destination of the next airport (Beijing) and before we reach the airport the flight attendant informs we are getting our connecting flight and when we get down and ask for our checked in baggage there is no one to respond on the airport when it is their home airport. Then one of the staff tells we would send it to Mumbai airport and when we land at Mumbai airport the Air China Staff tells we will send the baggage at home and the cost required for the material for your upcoming days would be compensated to you once you send us the bills. And when finally our bags come after 3 days we find half of our luggage missing and when we claim the company wont reply. This Airline is pathetic and I would never recommend anybody to travel by this airline. Regarding the staff support, Airline food, customer relation this airline has negative marking and most deteriorated services ever experienced.	0
Flew Air China from Tokyo to Beijing. Very slow and complicated checkin process. Poor customer service, they did not explain transit process in Beijing nor provide us with necessary transit forms. No customer service persons to help on arrival at Beijing. As a result of their poor service missed connecting flight. Have tried to contact airline numerous times, they refuse to discuss or reply to emails.	0
Horrible experience. They over booked the flight from Montreal to Punta Cana. My wife couldn't even get confirmed until last minute. Even though we booked our trip 2 months before. Never got to sit with her. Entertainment never worked. Ran out of food for passengers. Food was bad. Some staff were nice, but most were rude. Never fly with Air Canada rouge again. Would rate zero out of 10 but have to give a 1 minimum.	0
Montego Bay to Toronto. My husband and I have decided not to fly with Air Canada anymore. Hour and half late departing Montego bay Jamaica no snacks just a beverage for a 4 hour flight which turned into a six and a half hours flight. We sat on the tarmac for an hour and a half waiting to unboard the flight. With little or no updates until people were showing signs of frustration no offer of a complimentary drink or snack. When we landed we were told we would be off in 10 to 15mins which was a lie, it was an hour and a half later. With the seat belts sign on we were not allow to use the washroom for over an hour.  No consideration towards their customers they seems to be taking away more every time we fly. They only allow the small carry on for free. Every check bag you have to pay for..	0
Mexico City to Montreal. Aeromexico has the worst customer service I have ever encountered. Because of their negligence, I missed my return flight and then they insisted I pay for a new flight. It was my first trip to Mexico, and at no point was I told I would need the immigration paper they gave me on arrival to leave the country. They did not ask if I had it when I checked in, or at any point until I was boarding the plane. The immigration paper was in my checked bag, which they had enough time to remove, and make me buy a new ticket, but not to let me get another immigration paper. I asked the Aeromexico manager how many times a day this happens to people she said oh MANY. Then isn’t this a problem, I said, couldn’t Aeromexico check for this paper when the other documents are checked, at check in? She rudely said this was not their problem. In fact, Aeromexico makes a lot of money off this- if as she says many people a day encounter this and they do nothing to fix the issue.	0
Mexico City to Boston. Went on a girls trip the last week of April to Cabo flying into Mexico City via AeroMexico. Getting there no problem we all arrived all of our baggage arrived. However our leave date we are sitting waiting to board our flight the is to board and leave at 3:10pm. Another girlfriend and I are told we need to go to immigration to get the card we were given when we arrived ok no problem we have time before our flight leaves, however how about its told to every one flying into the Country that that slip is needed to get out, and how about the cost if it needs replacing? Give me a break there are all these procedures to get in and out of places I bet its not hard to verify who we are and where we are going or coming from. With that said we return to our gate at 3:00pm to learn our flight has left, its not supposed to leave until 3:10pm we learn we were not paged at all nor were any finally boarding calls made for this flight the customer service after this was absolutely horrendous! You are an international airport not one of your employees cared to apologize that our flight was gone nor did anyone care to speak English to help us everyone was pointing us in every other way, we were told there would be no flights until the next day. We then go to the AeroMexico counter where we encounter another rude employee who tells us there is nothing he can do but we can check with Delta so we go over to delta and he says all i can tell you is we have another flight but you need to get AeroMexico to change yours, so we go back to AreoMexico to try and explain what Delta has said, him not understanding. So we go back over to Delta and explain what AeroMexico says and that he will not go over and talk to him so Delta gets up and goes over to AeroMexico returns to us to say we now have 10 minutes to go to international baggage claim and get back to get this flight because our bags were removed from the flight. So we do not get back within 20 mins trying to get back to the correct place to book a new flight was shit because not one of your employees knew or understood English, we finally get to where we need to be and again we are told there are no flights. Then we are told its going to cost us a pretty penny to book a new flight home. So now we are in the process of trying to get reimbursed which is again hell.	0
There was fog at the destination airport and two or three flights before us, due to leave at 10.00 local time, were cancelled for this shuttle service. The screens never posted cancelled or delayed in any flight including ours two hours later. The screens only posted "Gate open". There were some weather announcements. In the end there was this: "Flight so and so is cancelled. Click". No information, no apologies (Aegean is by excellence the no excuses airline, have had other similar experience in the past) but worst of all, there was no info or any guidance as to what to do with our travel plans, our tickets, some sort of minimum empathy or a minor sample of the infamous Greek hospitality, Aegean claims to be the carrier of.	0
Flying Air Berlin OLB-TXL. Plane in a good condition and clean. Cabin attendants however very unpleasant and seemed just to wait to finish the job. Sandwich with cheese of very bad quality. Hope not to be in situation to fly them again.	0
After using United for many years on my trips from the US to Berlin I was excited to try Air Berlin. The fare was more than UA but I decided to try them. Mistake! The crew on my ORD to TXL flight seemed interested only in getting the service over with ASAP. The food was terrible and served ungraciously. The seats are hard and more cramped than on UA (I did not opt to pay extra for an XXL seat since I'm 5'2 and weigh 98lbs I didn't think I needed it). On my return TXL to ORD the fight experience a mechanical problem resulting in a 2 hr delay. The ground staff made an unintelligible announcement and then retreated behind a glass partition where no one could ask them anything. Again on board service was without a single smile. Same terrible presentation and lacklustre service. I will not be using Air Berlin again.	0
Beijing to New York JFK. I would not recommend this airline to anyone. They were careless enough to lose my baggage not only once but twice. The first time was at least city to city and now it was to a different country and they have no record of my luggage although my entire tour group and I witnessed them putting the tag on for JFK in check in. There hasn’t been anyone helpful during this situation as all my personal items whereabouts are unknown. The food was no good and there was very bad turbulence half of the ride. It’s one thing to lose someone’s luggage once, but twice is ridiculous!	0
Los Angeles to Tokyo via Beijing. Worst airline I have been on. If you are over 6 feet tall you will be miserable and there is nothing you can do. I would never fly with them for several reasons but the fact that they screwed up my itinerary then charged me 800 dollars was the main reason. Its hard finding someone who speaks english. The food was horrible and the seating is very small. I wish I would have read the reviews before I booked.	0
I flew Air China business class for the first time. I thought being part of star alliance they would be good. I land in Bombay and was told that the bag containing all my clothes was in Beijing and would come the next day. I was connecting to Bangalore and requested they deliver to Bangalore. After 4 days of calling and getting the runaround, I was told that the bag was found and would arrive the next day which is the day I was coming back to the US. Basically I got my bag 2 hours before my return flight. I had to buy clothes, toiletries and all the meetings were pretty much ruined. Also my bag was completely broken. Since the time I have come back I have called and asked for compensation and I was told to submit all details to their Los Angeles center. I did that and since then I have been emailing and calling to follow up and nobody has any answer.  No more Air China. The fare was $1000 cheaper than United but not worth it.	0
St. Lucia to Toronto. I’m unimpressed and disappointed. I wanted comfort on my way home and I wasn’t given it. I didn’t get the preferred seating (I get it, it’s not guaranteed) however, to be told I need to pay for my food by the flight attendant when I payed for it previously. My flight was delayed and I didn’t buy food in the airport because I was expecting to be fed. I have contacted the company and “in goodwill” they will only give me a 20% off my next flight. Which is insulting because I will never fly with them. They won’t do anything for me and “will continue to work hard on improving their customer service. I was ripped off and lied to. Do not fly with them. Do not get economy plus. There are way better air lines out there.	0
Toronto to Orlando. The plane was filthy. Delays with retrieving a baggage from under a plane for a passenger who did not make the flight along with the plane loosing power (no lights or air) on the taxi way caused a 3 hour delay before take off. After landing in Orlando 3.5 hours late, the door to the baggage compartment was "frozen shut" resulting in a 4 hour delay at baggage claim. Absolutely no communication from Air Canada once on the ground. We landed at 2:50am and luggage did not arrive until 6:45am. I wrote a complaint and was told I will be contact within 52 business days. Customer service is non existent.	0
Dublin to Boston. There was a booking error on our return trip. Customer representative charged 4 of us more than double the original round-trip price for the return change, telling us that this was the best we would get, take it now or leave now. We took it, and upon checking, we could have saved on Aer Lingus if we had left the return as it was and just booked a separate flight. In my over 55 years of flying different airlines, I have never been treated so unfairly.	0
Dublin to Dusseldorf. Weather was bad. Checked on Flightaware and Aer Lingus website. Both said plane was on time for 5:30pm Departure. At 6:15 were told departure 6:45. Started boarding plane. At 7pm flight was cancelled when half of passengers had already boarded aircraft. Communication after that was atrocious. Not sure whether flight was cancelled due to crew working hours limit. Passengers spoke individually to Gate Staff and asked them to communicate over the intercom to the whole group which they wouldn't do. No written communication was given. Issues which had to be resolved without any guidance from Aer Lingus were a) How to rebook to a later flight (24 hours later earliest available) b) How to exit airport as we had passed through passport control c) Where to get our bags d) Accomodation options e) Compensation options according to EU law No food vouchers or accomodation vouchers were given. Tried to ring Aer Lingus at 3am hoping it would be quiet. Was put on hold for 30 mins with no indication of when call would be answered. Filled in a complaint form on their website. Response was "A member of our Guest Relations team will review your request and personally reply to you within the next 60 business days" That's almost 3 months. Aer Lingus has to do some serious work in the customer relations area if they don't want to go out of business. As this would be a semi regular occurence it would have been helpful to get a handout showing what to do and covering a-e above.  A good airline is one that handles the situation rather than abandoning their passengers when a flight is cancelled	0
Amsterdam to Miami via Dublin. Due to the storm our flight was delayed several hours. My friend and I had a travel time over 30 hours. The Aer Lingus Customer Service Desk had only 1 person behind the counter when the incident happened and other 5-6 counters were empty for several hours. The managers told us that the Customer Service desk will be closed at 8pm, and there was nothing Aer Lingus can do at the moment. It would appear to have been more helpful if the managers took charge and provided a solution, looked for solutions, or provided some helpful constructive customer service. We were given breakfast tickets and were later told that the breakfast ticket was unusable in other venues and only usable by the cafe, which claimed to open 24 hours but didn’t have any food for us and Aer Lingus had closed already. So we also used our own money later to buy snacks. Then we found out that there was a difference between a meal ticket (which was apparently able to be used at any restaurant/supermarket in the airport) and a breakfast ticket (which was only to be used at the cafe). Since we connected the flight from Amsterdam to Dublin early AM, the entire day we were with Aer Lingus. Nothing was done, every response from our were questions were brushed off with unhelpful response. I believe this airline failed to remember the fact the only food they provided was a pack of cookies, therefore we couldn’t use the tickets and was given only 1 pack of water. I would like to highlight that this complaint is to the fact that Aer Lingus did not provide solutions nor notify us of the differences between the 2 tickets. I do not think I will ever fly with this airline again, I understand that weather conditions affected the flight patterns and caused delay but the customer service was horrible. The employees behind the ticketing booths and the managers were all very rude and accepted no responsibilities.	0
Our Aer Lingus flight from Ireland to Boston was cancelled due to "technical issues." They re-scheduled our flight to go from Ireland to New York JFK airport and then another flight to Boston airport. Due to the longer flight, we missed our connecting flight home to Denver. Now its 8pm and no flights out until 9am the next morning. My wife has bronchitis and a horrible cough. I asked them to help us with a hotel for the night and they said, "There is nothing we can do." Cheapest hotel is $400/night. So, now my poor wife is sleeping the night in a chair at Boston airport! They are very willing to take your money but not willing to take responsibility when they blow it. They were completely responsible for us missing our connecting flight home.  Heartless airline company. Never fly them again and I would highly suggest you consider your choices. Aer Lingus is horrible.	0
EY1996 AUH-HKT June 4th. Absolutely appalling customer service from the very rude and miserable "flight attendants" cramped seats awful food. We were given a (what they called) sandwich which was half the size of the palm of my hand and bottle of water this constituted a 'meal' just woeful. The people who run this airline should be embarrassed to be associated with this below par sub standard outfit. Never again. If Ryan Air flew > long haul I'd rather go with them.	0
Beijing to Shanghai. Worst experience ever had with an airline.  Totally irresponsible and rude to customers! My hands are shaking so much now with anger. I purchased a ticket this morning from Air China counter for a flight going from Beijing to Shanghai this afternoon. From Shanghai onwards, I’m to catch an international flight booked with another Airline. I’ve booked my Air China ticket ensuring there is around 3 hours transit time in Shanghai. Having been to Shanghai Airport many times before, I know that 3 hours is more than sufficient time for transit even with one hour delay from previous flight.  Firstly the attendant who sold me the ticket reassured me there will be no delay with the flight today. The flight was meant to depart 14:30pm, at 14:00pm there was an announcement saying the flight is delayed due to air traffic control and Air China staff refused to advise passengers the new flight time. At 17:00pm here I am sitting at the airport, flight is delayed almost 3 hours and flight still hasn’t departed. I contacted Air China, I asked them if there’s anyway they can compensate me because now I have definitely missed my next flight, as well as my hotel for the next night in Tokyo, the 3 day trip I booked from Tokyo. The answer is no, it’s your own fault, also reason provided now is that Air China won’t make compensation for weather related delays (how funny now they change the reason of delay from airport traffic to weather while it’s a clear sunny windless here in Beijing, they lied outright because they know they are not liable for weather related delays. Regardless of the fact many other similar flights by other airlines have departed on time today. So now I’m $2,000 out of pocket, tired, frustrated and angry and I need book another flight to Tokyo later which will add more to my expenses. I cannot believe the fact when they apologise for one minute delays in public transport in Japan while Air China lies to avoid responsibility of a delay from their own doing (who knows what the truth is). I’m absolutely done with this company and will never travel with them again.	0
Old, tired plane. Out of 3 washrooms, 1 washroom not working, one washroom had no water for sink. Long line up for washrooms throughout the flight, difficult for anyone to use the isle. Uncomfortable seats, extremely cramped, to the point that with the seat in front slightly inclined one does not have room to open up a laptop. Flight was full so carry-on luggage was scattered everywhere on board - in the case of an emergency no one would ever get out in any kind of reasonable time. Not that clear from the Air Canada website how entertainment system would work - has changed (for the worse) from last Rouge flight (2 years ago). On the plus side, the fight left on time and the landing was very smooth. I would not recommend Rouge for any flight over 2 hours, it is just too uncomfortable.	0
Air Canada rouge from Toronto to Jamaica. Just a horrible experience. Over 2.5 hour delay onboard with a toddler. The flight crew keep lying saying it will be a few minutes but it’s been over 2.5 hours. I will never fly Air Canada ever again. The seating hasn’t been cleaned for a very long time and there is dry old food on the seating tray. Maybe clean the plane once in a while.	0
Las Vegas to Montreal via Toronto. I have upgraded to business class on every flight I have taken on many different airlines and never had service as bad as we had on this flight. We upgraded 24 hours before, as I always do, and once in the plane, all they gave us was a bag of peanuts telling us that we cannot get food since we upgraded at the airport and it's too last minute to provide food (which was wrong). I know the upgrade details mentioned that we might not get the business class meal for free, but why were we not offered it for purchase, as we saw people in coach purchasing that same meal (which was for purchase on their inflight menu). Once we asked, the hostess became very rude and told us well have more drinks! Besides, the seats were way less comfortable than any other airline, especially Air Canada. So be careful when purchasing your tickets if you care at all about comfort because you will not get it, no matter how much you pay on Rouge.	0
Lima to Montreal. It is immoral of Air Canada to use this such an airplane for a long night flight over 8 hours. We were extremely uncomfortable, there was no entertainment and little service. The staff tells you to download the Air Canada Rouge application once on the plane when, if you are not from the country, likely you have no connection to download anything.	0
Bogota to Calgary via Mexico City. I have traveled on a number of national carrier, and AeroMexico indeed earns the review as the worst airline in the world! I arrived at Bogota's El Dorado airport for a 7:57am flight to Calgary, Canada, checked-in and received my boarding pass, cleared security, and headed to Gate 48 as was indicated on my boarding card. At 7:50am I learned that the proper gate was in fact 48A, which was separate from where my waiting area was at Gate 48. I never received any page over the intercom, and was  unaware of the difference in areas. After sprinting downstairs to Gate 48A on a mezzanine level I learned from another El Dorado Airport staff member not affiliated with AeroMexico (but still useless) that the boarding had closed and I had effectively missed my departure. I spent the next 30 minutes trying to track down an actual AeroMexico representative at which time I was told that the error was completely my fault, and that the best that AeroMexico could do was offer me it's "deepest regret" at my problem. The Bogota AeroMexico representative offered no solutions and ultimately took me to their back office in the airport where she proceeded to close a large door in my face, hide like a coward along with the rest of her colleagues, and summon security to escort me back to the main departure hall so that they could carry on with their day removed from my issue. Ultimately I had to book $1,500 worth of flights on United Airlines and linger around El Dorado for 16 hours before leaving on a 1:15am departure the next morning. AeroMexico has no interest in providing solutions to traveler problems has no interest in acknowledging their error even in spite of overwhelming evidence including official boarding passes stating the correct gate, AeroMexico website screenshots for the flight showing the same gate information as my boarding card even two hours after departure, and pictures of two entirely different locations (see attached) and is entirely focused on taking your money and reservation and then letting you navigate your way through their processes without any assistance and at your own peril. Save your time, save your money, save your effort and sanity, and book your travels to Central and South America with any other airline if you can, even if the number of connections and time to arrive at your desired destination is longer, as dealing with AeroMexico is a textbook lesson in business incompetence.	0
Glasgow to Dublin. The check in and flight itself was good. On time and reasonable. I am a cyclist and scientist and traveling for conference and training. I booked and paid for a bicycle. However, on return my bicycle carry box was damaged externally. I have had no offer of acceptance/not of liability, letter etc. When home (Glasgow), the bike frame had be damaged, which would have required a heavy force e.g. dropped form back of plane, heavy baggage dumped on top etc. The frame was unridable and needed replacing. I fly about 40 flights a year and have done for over 5 years with bike in this format with zero issues (mainly Air New Zealand and other Star Alliance carriers). OK. so occasionally some handling error may occur, this is life. However, I called, wrote, filled out online forms as recommended by AerLIngus. Replies were short and noted "please wait out team is reviewing it". I followed up 9 times over 2 months and still no response. I have now moved to my travel insurer for recovery of damage costs. Aer Lingus' baggage-ralated customer services is appalling 0.5 out of 10. It left a very sour taste and I would not travel Aer Lingus again nor can recommend this airline. If you do value your baggage and must travel with this poor airline, ensure you have it fully insured. reading other comments here, the airline has a baggage handling issue to sort out. Cheers.	0
Terrible customer service, rude and unhelpful. Flew Dublin to New York (Aer Lingus) and New York onto Las Vegas (jetblue) on 2 July. Bags never left Dublin until the 10 July and never received any bag for entire holiday. Supposedly bag arrived in Las Vegas sometime after this. On return to Dublin tried to trace bag whereabouts and was told by Aer Lingus that despite their mistake they would take no responsibility for the bag or helping find it and that it was jet blues issue, in saying this they were incredibly rude and unhelpful. Jet blue have then said they returned the bag from Las Vegas to Aer Lingus and said contact them to return it to Ireland. Now Aer Lingus refuse to say anything other then contact jetblue, but jetblue saying Aer Lingus have the bag! This is going on for 2 months and the time and money gone into trying to get bag back, nothing about the ruined holiday or the cost of additional clothing on holiday. At least jetblue try to help and have good customer service. Aer Lingus are just so rude and unhelpful and it was their mistake! Never flying with them again.	0
Chicago to Amsterdam via Dublin. My flight was cancelled and staff handled it very poorly, no one received anything. They gave us a sheet of paper with the wrong number/number that didn't exist. After asking around and searching their website we had to call a phone line that took 4+ hours to talk to someone and had a choice between rescheduling the next flight with them which was two days out or refund of the cancelled flight which means you have to pay expensive last minute flights with other airlines.	0
Air Berlin business class from Los Angeles to Berlin in May 2014. The first thing I noticed about Air Berlin business class: It's cramped. Very cramped. Air Berlin tries to sell the head-high dividers between its business class seats as "even more privacy" "even more isolation" and so on but in reality these are just flimsy plastic screens that fail to disguise the fact that Air Berlin has taken away about half the width of a "normal" business class seat and inserted another seat which is recessed so the other passenger's feet are sticking into your space. They manage to cleverly disguise this in their advertising by depicting only isolated seat units. In Air Berlin business class the feet of the person in the recessed seat next to you are a few inches away separated by a flimsy shaky plastic screen cutting into your space. The person in front of you is also recessed with their head sticking into your space. Air Berlin's plastic seat divider is - inexplicably - cut low in the back with the effect of exposing the top of your head if lower your back rest. If you recline and the person "behind you" (remember they're only half-way recessed) doesn't they're breathing on your scalp. If the person behind you coughs a lot - as happened to me - you're either coughed on the head a lot or you simply can't recline. This is exactly the kind of annoyance one pays to avoid in business class. In addition to significantly reduced width the seats are very short. I'm 185cms (6'1") and I could only "lie down" with my knees pulled up toward my chest. On my right the armrest was about four inches thick. On my left it was exactly the width of my index finger (not an exaggeration) and it was squeaky and wobbly (hard to believe but true). The in-flight entertainment is good with a solid noise-cancelling headset provided. The 15" screen is decent and operated via a remote with a mouse-like controller that works reasonably well but which your mother will not learn to use in a 100 years. The entertainment selection is limited. There were a few new movies but most of the selection was old stuff. There is a power outlet and a USB outlet. Storage is a problem. There is a compartment with cheap carpeting under the ottoman a pouch for magazines and rather small overhead compartments. Except for the medium-sized table there are no surfaces. Every business class passenger has - a few inches from their face - a strange UFO-looking contraption that turns out to be a combination of reading light and "night light." One can't help thinking this must be a case of designers gone insane. These units are unnecessary because there already is a reading light in the ceiling and ugly and cheap-looking producing the palest "night light" you could imagine. The food is pretty bad. Decent alcoholic beverages and snacks are available at any time. The flight attendants try pretty hard but they can't make up for the failings and cheapness of the cabin. They're nice but they'll throw you out of the kitchen immediately if you try to get up and stretch your legs a little. This shouldn't even be called "business class." It's more of a glorified economy class plus.	0
Phuket to Abu Dhabi. Most uncomfortable seat and with the smallest leg room I've ever experienced. Knees where wedged against the seat in front of me the entire flight and I'm only 5'11". They had to have the guy in front of me put his seat forward when serving the meals just to fit the food trays in. Entertainment and movie selection was laughable with nothing even remotely current. I know this is a low cost carrier but Ryanair is more comfortable that Air Berlin. Spend a few extra dirham and go with any other carrier than Air Berlin.	0
Flyer beware! I recently booked a flight through OneWorld Alliance-American Airlines. I received the confirmation email stating clearly a 2 baggage allowance. I arrived to the airport with an extra bag which I was prepared to pay for. The check in desk refused to acknowledge the baggage allowance in the confirmation email and preceded to charge my card for all the bags. The card was swiped several times as the agent said the charge would not go through. At this point I opted not to take the flight due to the excessive cost (550 Euro) and left with all my bags. I checked my account today only to discover that $412 USD has been taken from my account from AirBerlin. As I did not approve these charges I do not have a receipt. I attempted to call AirBerlin but was not able to get a human being on the phone.	0
Los Angeles to Bombay via Beijing. Worst airline ever. The flight from LAX  to Beijing on July 11th 2018 at 2:30 PM was cancelled and I was ordered to wait 24 hours for next flight and sent to a motel in LA. Later in the evening a customer service representative from Air China called me to say that they cannot book me for next day instead I have to wait for three more days due to complications with my connecting flight from Beijing to Bombay. She refused to cancel my ticket asking me to talk to my ticket agent. She also refused to confirm the flight cancellation (from LA to Beijing on 7/11/2018) and the website was showing the flight to be regular and not cancelled (although, all 300 passengers were accommodated in motels, etc.). My travel agent tried to contact several times but no air-china customer was taking the call even after 40 minutes wait on the phone. My electronic complaint to air china was responded with a web address/phone-number to talk to where no one picks up phone. I spent another $1000.00 to purchase a ticket through Delta airlines to go to Bombay. I am travelling internationally for over 35 years now and have traveled in many airlines. Based on the customer service, stone-walling any questions and for pure lying on their website and information centers, no one can beat air-china for the worst airline award. It is now four weeks I am trying to connect to someone there who would at least apologize but hey they don't consider anyone humans. My advise, better spend extra $100+ and book in one of the reliable airlines.	0
Stockholm to Manila via Beijing. Worst customer service ever! Would not recommend this airline and will I never fly with Air China again! - lost our baggage and nobody cared to search for it - six months later we have not recieved the compensation (although it has been promised to sent to us months ago) Every little move and step with them takes months. Nobody did not care to call back and check if baggage was recieved or not. I have never seen this bad customer service.. this is definitely a next level for a bad customer service!! If you want to save your time and nerve cells just don't choose Air China!	0
Montreal to Hong Kong via Beijing. Our flight from Montreal on May 19th departed at 4:00pm, 10 minutes earlier than the  departure time of 4:10pm. We had a connecting flight in Beijing on May 20th  at 6:30pm on flight and was supposed to be landing at 5:00pm however the plane only landed at 5:50 pm in Beijing. Due to this delay we missed our connecting flight to due the poor customer service from Air China at Beijing airport. When we arrived at the Beijing airport we were able to see that the were doing a last call however nothing was done to communicate to hold the plane for us and for other passengers that were supposed to be on that flight as well. This was the first time that we had flown with Air China and was the worst experience. We stayed in Beijing airport trying to figure out what to do until 9pm where we were told that we are getting a hotel to stay for the night with a meal included and will be catching a flight the next morning at 8am. We had taken a bus that brought us to a hotel which was the worst hotel ever in my life. Is this how you treat customers? We went into the restaurant hoping for a good meal after all of this terrible customer service and making us miss our flight. We were presented with a buffet that was the most disgusting food ever and with nothing to drink. Once we got into our room it smelled rotten and the bed was like sleeping on a piece of wood. The next day we went back to the airport to catch our flight and arrived in Hong Kong only to find out that one of our luggages is missing and that it was still in Beijing and the other luggage was damaged with one of the wheels broken which I had to purchase another luggage($150). We ended up getting the missing luggage delivered to us 12 hours later and found out that the luggage was damaged as well with the handle on the side ripped off. This is ridiculous and the customer service that Air China provides is way below standard and is a joke. On our way back from Japan on June 7th at Haneda airport, when checking in, we had asked for an upgrade to Premium economy for the flight CA879 from Beijing to Montreal and they agent had told us that the do not do upgrades and we would need to do it in Beijing when we catch our connecting flight. Once we got to gates in Beijing they told us that they do not do upgrades either. Customers looking to upgrade their seats and give Air China more money are turned down.  That being said, overall this is the worst experience I have ever witnessed from an airline.	0
I flew on Air Canada from Calgary to Las Vegas last December 28, 2018. I checked-in one luggage and had no carry on with me since it was a direct flight I didn't feel the need to bring a carry-on bag since all my things could fit in my checked-in luggage. I paid the baggage fee and checked-in earlier to make sure that I won't miss my flight. As soon as I passed through security I found out that my flight was delayed so I had no choice but to wait for another hour. That was tolerable and for whatever reason Air Canada would have I felt that I didn't need to make a big deal out of it. The worst part of my Air Canada experience was that upon Arrival in Las Vegas, I found out that my bag never made it to Las Vegas. I immediately went to the baggage claim office to file a report and they said that I would have to contact Air Canada so that they could trace my bag and send it to me. How the hell do you lose a luggage on a direct flight? Could you imagine how frustrating it was to be in a place where you literally had no clothes or any of your belongings with you for a 7 day trip? I have planned this vacation a long time ago and it was my only vacation for the year 2018. I have prepared a lot for this trip thinking that I would finally be able to relax and get my much needed rest. But I was wrong, Air Canada ruined my vacation because I mostly spent my time making a lot of phone calls, sending emails during the trip and what's worst is that I was only compensated for $200 which doesn't even compare or amount to the stress, hassle and huge inconvenience that they have caused me. They never really followed up anything with me during my whole vacation in Las Vegas. My luggage never arrived in Las Vegas. I had to literally buy everything in Vegas from underwear to toiletries. I had to always made time to just call them to check whether they have found my luggage. I never got the chance to give the presents that I have packed for my friends in Vegas. It was such a terrible and frustrating experience. As a frequent passenger of Air Canada I felt that this made me realize what kind of customer service Air Canada delivers in situations like this. Trust me, in case this happens to any of you, you can be assured that you will be getting the worst customer service. I never enjoyed my only vacation in Vegas in 2018 just because Air Canada failed to do their job and reassuring me that my luggage was safe and secured with them. If I never suggested the idea of calling the Calgary Airport to check whether my luggage is still there then I probably still don't have my luggage until now. There was no initiative on their part and their plan of action in reassuring their passengers that they will be able to track their luggage is very poor. It's sad to say that as I type this horrible experience from Air Canada, the $200 hasn't been paid. God knows when they will actually reply and take action on this. It's not even the money that I'm complaining about but its more on the amount of time that I wasted just to check the status of my luggage every now & then, the huge amount of stress thinking if I will ever find my luggage and my vacation plans were absolutely ruined just because everything that I needed for my trip was not with me all because of Air Canada's fault. How can you compensate all that? It's not like you can redo my vacation in Vegas all over again. The damage is done. I am so disappointed & frustrated with my experience with Air Canada. Never again.	0
I received an email 1 hour before the flight that the flight was canceled due to maintenance issues. They returned all the bags to us and didn't do anything for us. They said it was canceled due to weather issues (although the email said something else). They didn't provide any voucher for a taxi or hotel. My flight got postponed for 24 hours.	0
Calgary to El Salvador via Mexico City. Aeromexico in Calgary, never checked that my passport had 5 months and 28 days to expire, in Mexico City they did not allow me to take the next flight to El Salvador. I have to stay in Mexico City and after 3 days, spending more than US$1,000 the Canadian embassy issued a temporary passport. At this point my nightmare continued, they lost one of my 4 bags that l checked in Calgary. After one month dealing with this company, they only paid me back $1,100 Canadian dollars and my claim was for $4,000 US.	0
London to Cork. The flight service is reasonable for the money, they charge for everything, bags ,meals and all seats with charges depends on the class. But the booking through the airline website is a disaster, I booked my flight online where for 1st time after completing the booking process including the payment the the window took long time look like loading or processing and surprisingly the window back to where all the flight details again and I have to start all over again. I waited 10-15 mins when I did not receive any confirmation email as well as I have created account where it did not show any booked trip, so I went back and booked my flight which is urgent and I needed to confirm the booking for my company. When I received the bank statement I found out they charge me twice where there is only receipt of one flight and one person. Calling the customer service did not help as nothing in their system Proof this duplicate payment so I have to fill the online form for refund where the only proof is the bank statement that is made me look like i took advantage of the company money and the investigation in the airline in the email said they may take up 60 days! What kind of poor service is this	0
Knock to Gatwick. I am just onboard my very late return to London. I dread the flights as it does not leave on time. This is a budget airline charging a premium. This set of flights cost over £400. Ryanair cost half but for me fly into the wrong airport. I was kind of hoping the cost would mean quality but no. Far from it.	0
Dublin to Orlando. Everything was fine with the flight except the lady in front of my husband decided to put her seat back and refused to move it, even when he was served his snack. Staff would not help. Did not ask her to sit upright until the very last minute before we landed, even though everyone else had been asked to do this half an hour before in preparation for landing. You get what you pay for and next time we will pay for Virgin. It is worth it!	0
Beijing to San Francisco. Worst customer service ever. We were told that there were business class seats available for upgrade purchase but they kept on telling us that we had to wait for people to come to our gate. When someone finally came to the gate. She was very unpleasant and didn’t even acknowledge us and just gave us this dirty look as if we were bothering her. Never again will we fly with this airline again. Everyone does not know how to help people that do not speak their language and they have a whole lot of attitudes. They shouldn’t work in a customer service based job if they don’t know how to deal with customers. If I was able to rate it a 0 out of 10 I would have	0
Manchester to Toronto via Moncton. Terrible experience from start to finish. Budget airline now nothing like the airline we travelled with years ago so dont be fooled into thinking it is an upgrade airline, I would compare it to as poor Ryanair. 3 out of 4 flights were delayed, no meals given, no apologies, no compensation whatsoever. Baggage did not arrive on our onward flight. What more can I say only I will never fly with Air Canada rouge again. They offered us discounted flights for this year, but who would want to go through that experience again, we are pensioners for goodness sake.	0
Toronto to Miami. You pay with points or cash for business class but it’s no better than economy on most other airlines. Air Canada should be ashamed. Unless I cannot use another airline I’ll avoid Rouge, even if I have to pay more. No room in overhead bins. Can barely fit anything under seat either!	0
Horrible customer service who was not empathetic with my flight being cancelled and Air Canada not being able to accommodate me on a different direct flight that day. Did absolutely nothing to make up for the schedule change. Horrible. Will never fly with Air Canada again.	0
Worst flight experience. Travelled with two small children and two car seats. When flight was booked it stated one carryon and one personal item per passenger. We took 2 carry on bags and strapped the car seats to each for more convenient transport since we had two small children in tow. When we went to get boarding passes, they told us we had to check our carryons. I told them it was our mode of transport for the car seats and they said it was policy on small full flights that all carryons be checked unless flying business class. I said can we just check at the gate if there is truly no space. Again told no. I said it would have been nice to have been told this information sooner than the day of the flight o we could have arranged for a different mode of transport for the car seats or packages them properly to check them. The first gate wasn’t too far but to get to the connecting flight it was far. We had to carry these bulky awkward car seats with no good surfaces to hold the entire trip. When we boarded the first flight and the flight attendants were closing the overhead storage compartments, they closed several empty compartments, yet we had to check our bags. Upon arrival to our destination we found that they had now lost our carry on luggage that they forced us to check in the first place. Reported that it was not there and they told us it was in our layover city and they would get it in next possible flight and deliver that evening or next day. Second day of no luggage and we are going to have to buy more diapers and toothbrushes and hairbrush and at least a change of clothes for our children. They cannot even tell us where the luggage is when we call. They are marked and scanned throughout the process so how is that not registering in the system when they enter in the id number for the tagged bags. This is not the first time we have lost luggage on a flight, but it is the first time we have not been able to get information regarding the process of retrieval. There is no good contact number to just call and file a complaint. It was an email process. This airline is in no way accommodating to family travel aside from somewhat early boarding. They give conflicting information when you do talk to a company representative, and offer no real answer as to how they are working to resolve your issue. They offer zero compensation for the major inconvenience.	0
I have had a very bad experience with Air Canada. I was flying round trip from London to Toronto late last year and they completely destroyed my luggage. After a rude encounter with the Air Canada lady at Toronto airport I had to go through months of unanswered emails and calls to try and sort out the situation. Eventually they agreed to refund me for my damaged baggage 3 months later. However, they would only send me a compensation in a Canadian bank account, which of course I don't have as I am a tourist. I explained this over multiple emails and calls, but nothing happened. I was told repeatedly to just be patient and they would contact me when they could find the time! That never happened. The voucher for the compensation expired and they never answered my demands for an alternative payment type. It has now been over 6 months and I have lost all faith. I believe they never intended to compensate me or indeed any other foreigner. I am convinced that if I was a Canadian they would have compensated me ages ago.	0
Seattle to Medellin via LAX / Mexico City. Aeromexico made major changes to my itinerary, instead of waiting 2 hours in each airport (how I booked the flight) I would have to wait 16 hours on my first flight and 11 hours on the second one. For this reason I could not take this flight. The airline offered me a refund of 100% of the cost of my ticket. Now that the flight was cancelled they are putting all the responsibility to the agency that I booked with saying that I have to talk with the agency. While the agency tells me that they have accepted giving me a refund but they need the refund from the airline. The agency is still waiting for the money back to give me my refund. And at the same time Aeromexico throws the ball to the agency. I have been on this issue for more than two weeks. Every time I call the answers I get are very blurry and they don't give me a straight forward answer. I have requested to talk with supervisors but they say that the supervisors are not there. Or simply they leave me waiting for one hour of waiting on the phone and finally they hang up (this has happened several times).	0
Quito to Mexico City. In Quito, I locked my suitcase with a TSA-approved lock. When I claimed it in Mexico City, the two metal fasteners to which the lock had been attached had both been cut and the lock was gone. Apparently the perpetrators were not interested in what was inside (mostly dirty laundry!), but the suitcase was permanently damaged and can no longer be locked. I complained to AeroMexico online, which promised a prompt response. 5 weeks later, I got an e-mail from them giving me a case number and asking for photos of the suitcase, my boarding pass, the luggage receipt, and my passport. I furnished those. They then replied that the damage was considered "minor" and not eligible for compensation "under our internal policies." So, tough luck, customer. Buyer, beware. I will not fly Aeromexico again.	0
Cancun to Mexico City. I am a frequent flyer and I have never experienced anything worse from any airline. 5 hour delay for a 25 minute flight and then refusing to let a family with a baby to board the plane because their attitude was bad. They are rude and disrespectful to customers. We had  paid for an upgrade and it was removed at the airport. We were told to speak to the customer service hotline to try get a refund for the upgrade. Good luck with that!	0
Terrible customer service.  I needed to make some last minute changes to my itinerary. I was given a quotation for the changes which Aer Lingus later advised was given in error but they refused to honour. I had to pay nearly 3 times the original quotation. They also made errors on the amount they charged my credit in Euros and have so far refused to resolve the issue. The flights themselves were uneventful but disappointing. The planes were old but had maybe been refitted with new seats in recent years. The inflight entertainment is basic and I found it hardly worth watching. My USB charger point did not work and only one earphone worked. I ordered 2 kids meals and 2 gluten free meals 48 hrs in advance and did not receive any of them. The final insult was having to pay for alcoholic beverages on the flights.	0
Hartford to Dublin, I booked this August 2018 flight for my honeymoon back in December. When I went to go through my itinerary for my entire trip one last time my flight was cancelled! I received no notice of this I had already been charged and my fiancé and I spent over 10  hours on hold starting Friday afternoon and did not get in touch with someone until Sunday morning who said no one could help us over the phone it had to be done through email! At this point we were in a straight panic and had to rebook so now we have paid twice for our honeymoon and frankly are too frustrated to even be excited about it. Still have not received any response from numerous emails sent and numerous claims submitted through their website. Not to mention I booked directly with Aer Lingus thinking that would put in the most secure position for my honeymoon travel plans!!!	0
Booked 12 tickets for my family to go to my daughter's wedding. After a flight cancellation on the last 10 travelers and later flight delay on United, our Aer Lingus flight was missed. (Aer Lingus booked the first 7 tickets but said they were out of seats on the United flight, so they had me book the last 5 directly.) 4 Tickets were rebooked on United but since Aer Lingus refused to release the tickets for the last 5 travelers, they were left in Newark. Had to purchase new tickets on Norwegian the next day. Aer Lingus left a family with a special needs child at the airport and refused to help. Customer service was non existent, wouldn't provide a person to talk to and said the only recourse was to file a complaint on line. The answer to the complaint was United Airlines ruined the plans, but Aer Lingus is not responsible.	0
I have flown with Air China for the third time and this will be my last. Service is terrible. Flight attendants were rude at times. Food is also terrible. Since it's first come first served, there is no guarantee you can choose what meat you prefer since it will run out. The rice is always bad, so sticky and the noodles are not better. People (and flight attendants) will speak Chinese to you if you are Asian and mostly will continue to do so even when you tell them you are not Chinese. Transiting in Beijing is also a terrible experience. If you don't know where to go, even if you ask they are not very happy and look very annoyed that you asked. Or worse, just shouted at you in Chinese and pointed to somewhere. The time of transit is very short, which you will easily miss your next flight (more troubles). The last thing I am most frustrated about is, at the end of the flight, you will likely lose your luggages. Happened a few times already. And when it does, you have to wait at least 3 days for it to delivered (very late at night). So, never again.	0
Vancouver to Hong Kong via Beijing. I have never been compelled to write a review for anything. Ever. That was until I experienced the absolute most horrendous customer service from Air China.  I was travelling with a group of 7. I had booked a round trip from Edmonton to Hong Kong. This booking was done via Flight Hub which would include an Air Canada flight from Edmonton to Vancouver and an Air China flight to HK. Upon arrival at the airport in Edmonton Air Canada alerted me that my middle name was missing from the flight info and were happy to add it. Air Canada updated both my boarding passes. When I got to Vancouver I went to the Air China check in counter to receive my boarding pass and I waited 2 hours until they told me I wouldn't be allowed on the flight because of my missing middle name. This information came was communicated to me 10 minutes before gate closing. This gave me absolutely no time to contact Air Canada or Flight Hub for help. Air China were unwilling to add my middle name despite showing my passport and other government issued IDs. I had to cancel and rebook my entire round trip because they wouldn't add my middle name on the return flight either. One of my friends stayed behind and took the flight with me. On the return flight my friend was rejected from the flight for "breaking the sequence". Upon enquiry Air China confirmed that his seat was still reserved for him but he would have to pay an $1200 USD to get it back. Air China was incredibly unhelpful and threatened to call security when was asked why he was rejected from the flight even though they themselves confirmed the seat was reserved for him.	0
Seoul Gimpo to Beijing. I have to admit that this is the first time that i have been driven to write a review of an airline. I have elite status on Star Alliance and One World. In all my travels i have never come across a worse airline than Air China. I am writing today warn off my fellow travelers from this airline which probably should be de-certified in a number of territories. I recently booked a ticket from Seoul to Beijing on the US website. Unfortunately there is a glitch in a the system and my name repeated itself (for example it appears as John John Smith Smith). I also can confirm this was not me accidentally entering my name twice because - before noticing the error - I booked a second itinerary and the same thing happened. And now for the incredible waste of time. The US 800 number basically does not answer. When calling the 24 hour number in China given their poor English they seemed convinced that I was somehow trying to do a name change. The UK number answers on a loop - throughout the UK work day - that the call center opens at 9am. Then disconnects. The French number on the Air China website is not valid. The loss of time in the last 48 hours has been absolutely breathtaking and I would have paid the double with another airline had I known. Resolution? 40 minutes to get a US rep who asked that I send my passport in despite confirming that there is a glitch in their booking system which allows for passenger names to be repeated. Still waiting for confirmation that the issue is resolved. Avoid Air China. Buyer Beware.	0
I flew from Montreal to Phoenix via Toronto. Toronto to Phoenix there was no room for cabin luggage that were sent to luggage bay. And my checked luggage did not make it to Phoenix. The Air Canada employees in Phoenix were very reassuring. It was Monday 11:30pm and they told me that the luggage was still in Toronto and will be delivered at home tomorrow morning. On Tuesday morning, no bag was delivered and I phone to customer service : they told me the luggage was not located. On Wednesday, 48h after the lost of my luggage, I phone back to customer service and the status of luggage was still "lost". I took the name and number of the employee and asked to speak to his supervisor. The supervisor called me back 5 minutes later to tell me that the baggage was found in the meantime.  I spent 500USD that day to replace some sporting goods in the luggage, but the supervisor gave me only 200USD of compensation given that the bag will be delivered on flight AC1837 the next day. The delivery at home could take 24h, so I said I will come to the airport. At 12pm, the status of my luggage on "world tracker" website was still indicating that the bag was on flight 1837 that left Toronto at 8am. I came to the airport and surprisingly the bag was not there. An employee  told me that the status of the bag changed 15 minutes after landing of flight 1837 : the status is now that the bag will arrive at midnight, via flight 1835. Never trust world tracker website : even if the bag is not on the plane, the status indicates the opposite even after landing of the plane 4 hours late ! The incompetence of the employees makes this website useless. I asked explanation to the employee and he showed me on his computer that my bag was a rush bag. Why Air Canada did not tag my delayed bag as urgent (72h delay at this time) as they are supposed to do with delayed bag? I finally got my luggage on Friday at 1am after coming 12h later at the airport. On the way back there was no room for my cabin luggage, and it was sent to luggage bay. But they put the wrong name on the luggage tag and I had to quickly ask to put the right tag on my luggage unless it would be lost somewhere.	0
Toronto to Porto with Air Canada rouge. Older plane, delayed by 2 hours due to technical problem. Not much leg space, even for those seats for extra $100. For in-flight entertainment you need to download an app prior to boarding, it didn’t work for us. One AC outlet for 2 seats. I found flight attendants rude, no tea/coffee. One piece of luggage delayed for 24 hours.	0
Flew Punta Cana to Toronto. Complete trash airline. Mechanical delays are frequent and they do nothing to compensate except give a useless discount on your next flight which none of us will ever use because we will never book with Air Canada rouge again. Flight to vacation delayed 6 hours flight coming home delayed 6 hours now stuck at the resort with no room or accommodations and they do nothing.	0
The worst airline on the planet. They will cancel your flights, make you sleep in the airport and not refund your money after you find a competent airline to get you home. I made it home with the other airline before the Air Canada flight ever left. They will make you wait in very long line ups and then spend hours on the phone to get zero results. They do not care about their customers.	0
Horrible Customer service. Our first flight was delayed 6-7 hours due to “technical issues” which was going to make us miss our connecting flight, and the only other flight they could get us on was 7 hours after we land in our connecting city,  a total of 13 hours in delays and the only compensation they gave us was one, $300 MXN or ($20 CAD) voucher for food at only one restaurant for the 13 hour delay. It was almost insulting to receive that voucher. I am disgusted in the customer service and policies they claim the must  follow.	0
Washington to Mexico City was uneventful other than the fact that the plane was incredibly old, reeked of fuel, and there was zero padding left on any of the seats. MEX back IAD and beyond was where AeroMexico showed its true colors. While attempting to board the plane we were informed that there was customs form that was mandatory to board. Absolutely our fault for not having these (we arrived 10 days prior and had discarded these not knowing how important they were). We were told that we needed to go back to the immigration office and get new ones and that it would take 5 minutes and they would wait. So we ran and while sprinting back up to the gate they looked up saw us approaching and proceeded finish closing the boarding door. We begged, pleaded, etc obviously to no avail. After that we were basically treated like dog sh*t to be scraped off a shoe and be rid of as quickly as possible. We were told by the gate agents (just rude angry people) ticketing agents (dead-eyed and uncaring) and supervisor (slightly more sympathetic but also completely unwilling to actually do anything for us) that immigration documentation is our responsibility, and as such we would need to pay $250USD per plus about $400 in fare difference (that's $650 each or $1,300 in total y'all) to simply get rebooked on the same flight the next day (it had seats available). Trying to get us on another earlier flight with a partner airline was completely out of the question. Uninterested in this extortion we ended up paying for a hotel for the night and used points to book a return flight on a real airline. But hold on folks it gets better! Our bags! They were checked on the original flight. Upon returning to the US I called their 800 number and got someone who told me that I needed to call the lost and found line (a Mexican number). This not sounding quite right to me (I had the bag tags and wanted them to just do a search and locate them) I asked if there was a supervisor I could speak to. I was put on hold and after waiting for over an hour, ultimately hung up. The number he gave me to call is unsurprisingly not in service. At as loss for what to do I drove to the airport and went to the ticket counter (they fly one flight a day out IAD and don't have a baggage office). Here I found some nice people that actually tried to help. They did a search and told me the bags were still in Mexico City. "Oh Wait, they didn't tell you?" she says. When you don't board a flight that you checked bags on they're required to remove your bags from the flight before they depart! You should have been told to pick them up in Mexico City and recheck them on your next flight! They filed a request to have the bags brought up on the next flight and promised to call with an update on when that would be the next day. That was two days ago. They gave me a number to call and check on the bags. It goes directly to a VM box. I left a message. Not confident I'll get a response. There are thousands of dollars worth of climbing gear and technical clothing in those bags. I guess it's possible that I will see this all again but I'm losing hope. For anyone who might have had baggage issues with this airline here's the baggage number: 571-502-8784. Bottom Line, stay away. It's not worth the $100 you might save to fly on this airline. Incompetence and a customer service apparatus that is very clearly designed to keep you at arms length and make it impossible get help.	0
Birmingham to Athens return. Main reason I used Aegean on this route is the direct flight during Summer time as Aegean doesn't fly the route during Winter and I usually fly Lufthansa, Swiss, Austrian or Turkish Airlines throughout the year. Really disappointed to realise that the airline I was once proud of has fallen behind the competition. The aircraft was late on departure both ways of my trip. The seats are too close to each other and too narrow (30 ins pitch as LH). The food was unacceptable for a Greek airline that represents the country with the best cuisine in the world, both ways of my journey exactly the same food and each time worse that the previous one.  Cabin crew professional but with attitude and poor training, Night flight and they left the lights on throughout the whole flight without dimming them, announcements were too loud and hasty (especially in English), asked for water twice and they forgot it both times. The  magazine torn from previous use. Lufthansa uses small plastic holders where they offer the magazine so it doesn't get spoiled by use. Finally inflight entertainment is absent.	0
Los Angeles to Dublin. Made a reservation and bought an exit row seat for $70. A few days before my outbound flight I checked my flight details and found that they had changed my seat to a regular seat. I called and got it changed back. On the day I left they changed it to a regular seat again and I had to fight to get my exit row $70 seat back. Crooked behavior! Then at check in they refused to check my back through from Dublin to Leeds on an Aer Lingus flight because, I bought the ticket from Expedia? They told me if I wanted the convenience of checking bags through I had to buy the ticket directly from them. They do not participate in the TSA or Global Entry programs so I waited 1 hour 23 minutes in security at LAX which is always absolute chaos in terminal 2. In flight crew were at best indifferent and mostly just rude. One very small meal two hours after takeoff then not even a snack for 10 hours. Wine outrageously expensive and water was not offered once for 10 hours. When I went back to the galley to ask for water the curtain was drawn so no passengers welcome! Arrival was chaotic (jetway was wrongly placed). I would never fly this airline again. They said that the $70 seat got me priority boarding and at the gate they told me, no you wait till your row is called! Today I was supposed to fly from Leeds to Dublin and then from Dublin back to LA the Dublin flight so far is delayed over 5 hours. I have been waiting 2 hours to even talk to someone about getting rebooked but no one available and again, they refused to check my bag through to LA because I booked the Leeds to Dublin flight through Expedia even though both my flights are on Aer Lingus. Absolute chaos with delay, no one has a clue what to do. Avoid this mickey mouse airline at all costs. Not only are they horribly inefficient but their personnel are either very rude or worse, indifferent.	0
This was the worst trip ever. The crew on the ground doesn’t have a clue of what they’re doing. It took them 3 hrs before they announced that our flight was cancelled due to mechanical issues. Then there was a staff who informed us that we will be refunded the amount of our new flight if we rebook the flight ourselves as their person are taking a long time doing the rebooking. After we rebook a flight with another airline, we were then informed that a full refund is not a guaranteed and was given a Delayed Flight Form that we are to give to their Air China colleagues when we arrive in Vancouver. I was already mad as we had to take care of everything ourselves and have been misinformed. This misinformation costs me $925 CAD. A very expensive misinformation. When I got to Vancouver, the 2 employees on their Air China booth said they can’t assist me with my issues and to call or email Air China! So I called. I called more than 10 times now and the call keeps getting cut off. I also sent an email and there was no help there either. Thanks was told to cancel the booking and request a refund (no detailed information given) But it won’t be the $925 I paid to get to Vancouver. I was also told to call the Philippine office. When I asked if they’re going to cover my overseas call charges, I never heard anything back. I will never recommend them to anyone. Worst customer service! If there’s a zero rating here, that’s what I’ll score them.	0
Los Angeles to Osaka via Beijing. The seats are narrow and a packed Air China plane is not comfortable, especially for a long haul. I had to transfer in Beijing. For some reason I've not been able to figure out, the itinerary I'd been sold didn't leave enough time to get from the arrival gate to the departure gate of the connecting flight. I don't know if that was Air China's fault or the agent (Flighthub)'s fault. The Air China personnel at the airport strenuously maintained that it wasn't their fault. They claimed their only responsibility was to take off on time, and if I missed the connecting flight, that was my fault. Out of the goodness of their hearts, they said, they would allow me to board another flight the next morning. So I had to wait around in Beijing airport for a flight the next morning. As a result, I incurred some expense from missed connections and reservations in Japan. Although I've not been able to find out to this day whose fault it was that I missed my connection, Air China's unsympathetic attitude towards stranded travelers struck me unfavorably, and I'll probably try to avoid doing business with them again.	0
Toronto to Mexico City. I paid for extra leg room as I am tall (6'5") and on the return trip from Mexico the trip was abominable. I had to either spread my legs out, or cross them in forming an X. In addition, because the airline charges for checked baggage, there was no room for my backpack except under my seat, which limited the available leg room even more. Three days after the experience, I still have back pain and leg cramps. In addition, the app for inflight service demanded to be updated, and the wifi provided by the place did not allow for the update except by paying wifi fees. I will never fly with Air Canada Rouge again.	0
I travelled round trip from Seattle to Punta Cana via Toronto. On the way there, there were several issues. First off, seats were highly uncomfortable. Furthermore, the cushions were poorly secured, and slid around underneath you. The leg room was nonexistent. I literally could not fit my knees in front of me on the plane.  There were no power outlets or Wi-Fi on the plane. The return flight was what really set this experience apart though. Terrible seats, no leg room, no amenities. However, the airline made a mistake scheduling the flight, causing it to be 3 hours delayed. Our layover was 3 hours and 40 minutes, which meant that we would have 20 minutes to get to our gate. We contacted the airline about this, and they assured us that we would easily be able to make our connection (quote “that is plenty of time to get there”), and that they would hold the plane back a few minutes to wait for us if necessary. Upon arriving after an uncomfortable and long flight, we could not make it to the other gate in time, and they refused to hold it back for us. The airline scheduled us flights to Seattle the next day, with a layover. We were supposed to get to Seattle Sunday afternoon, but our new flight plan had us arriving late Monday evening. We then waited over 2 hours in line at a very busy and crowded Air Canada service desk. the service was incredibly slow, but eventually they told us that there were much better flights we could have got that would have gotten us home much earlier, but they sold out in the time we stood in the line. I am writing this review from the run down hotel they offered us, after having a meager dinner with the insufficient food vouchers they gave us. I fly a lot, but my entire experience with Air Canada was consistently and extremely awful.	0
Fort Lauderdale to Montreal on Air Canada. Check in was smooth and handled by a friendly and courteous agent at the Priority counter. Unfortunately things went downhill from there on. Boarding was absolute mayhem with gate agents giving conflicting instructions. To make matters worse, instead of using the zone-based queues at the designated gate, they decided to use the lanes of the neighbouring gate causing a mass migration, not to mention confusion, for some 200 passengers. The gate agents were not only unorganized they were actually surly with the passengers. In the end it became a free-for-all boarding experience. When I got on board, I mentioned the chaos at the gate to one of the agents who was not even remotely interested in hearing about it and pretty much brushed it off. We were almost 40 minutes late leaving FLL which stretched the flight duration from 3 hours to 4 gate to gate. During this time the FA’s came around with water and beverage service only once and acted as if they were doing the passengers a favour. In all my travels around the globe I have never encountered a flight crew so aloof and uninterested in doing their jobs. The hard product was decent and the IFE had a good selection of movies, music and games. The washrooms looked like they had not been tended to in weeks and they surely were not going to receive any attention from the crew operating the flight. After landing, it took almost 40 minutes for the bags to be delivered. I have travelled over 1.3 million miles with Air Canada and this one has to be the poorest experience I have had.	0
The seats that are comically narrow for an average-sized person. I made the mistake of purchasing two round-trip tickets from Orlando to Montréal, hoping for a comfortable flight next to my wife in a two-seat row. Unfortunately, the seats proved to be too small by 2 to 4 inches for most people, and for me, almost six inches. While I am 6 feet 2 inches tall and weigh 280 lbs, I am not excessively large. As soon as the seatbelt sign was turned off, I had to stand for the entire flight until it was back on, as there was no comfort in those seats for either me or my wife. The flight attendants were indifferent to our plight. In particular, one of them kept knocking into my wife whenever she passed by. Although it was probably not intentional, my wife eventually had to change seats to avoid her. Moreover, the crew at the Orlando airport was making overlapping announcements, making it impossible to comprehend their boarding process and group numbers.	0
Terrible airline! My direct flight was cancelled due to bad weather. Air Canada rescheduled my flight for the next day with a layover without checking if that works for me. My and my husband tried to contact Air Canada to cancel rescheduled flights but no one was answering the phone. It was not possible to get hold of anyone. I tried to dispute $427 transaction without success. Don’t use this airline!	0
11th April SU0260 Moscow-Tokyo. 21st April SU261 Tokyo-Moscow. Flew on a Airbus A330 from Tokyo to Amsterdam through Moscow. First time Aeroflot but never again. A list of disappointments: All announcements were in 3 languages: Russian English and Japanese even the sales and priority rewards announcements. During the 9 hour flight we only got a cold drink once(!) even during dinner we didn't get anything to drink other than coffee or tea afterwards. This was a day flight and I didn't sleep so I didn't miss anything I'm sure. 1.5 hour delay which is perfectly acceptable for me but don't let us board and tell us every 5 minutes that the delay will be an extra 5 minutes (and in 3 languages again). The sign "fasten seatbelts" was lit for 3/4 of the flight but I didn't feel any turbulence at all seemed like the stewards didn't want people to stretch their legs. Very outdated multimedia system no subtitles available. Stewards refuse to speak English and explains everything in Russian constantly.	0
San Francisco to Guadalajara. This company has the worst customer service. There are many things that they did wrong. First, our flight got delayed because of the bad weather but we managed to get to the airport for our connecting flight 1 hour prior to departure. However, there was no staff from Aeromexico at the counter so we couldn't get our boarding pasess. No self-check in option either. Called customer service and their solution was to book another flight because they couldn't do anything. What an awful, stressful and enraging experience. Never booking with them again.	0
Flew Rhodes to Athens with Aegean. Cabin crew were rude and unfriendly as I don't speak Greek. Seat was dirty from the previous person on the previous flight. They didn't care, they just wanted to get everyone on board. No apologies. Used to love travelling with Aegean but their service has really gone downhill these last few months.	0
Hong Kong to Vienna via Beijing.. Horrible experience with Air China. Flight was late due to bad weather. Sitting on a plane. Out of nowhere went up. Circling above Hong Kong then trying to avoid the thunder storm we did not know was being ahead. Terrifying turbulence. Then 1,5 hour with total helplessness what was going on. Flight attendants did not know either. Captain speaking: "Need to land in Wuhan due to bad weather" - flight cancelled. Stuck at immigration desk (literally). Officers could not let us thru as we did not have Chinese visa - did not need any when you traveled to Hong Kong. Cannot go thru unless there is a new itinerary booked for us. It was 2am entire airport closed till 6am. No english speaking people in Wuhan Airport. Booking system opened at 6:30am. Took ages to get a new itinerary. Surprisingly the new flight times were not able to fit each other. Long story short - after 20hrs spending in China we finally flew away home. Never ever fly with Air China.	0
Nice to Montreal. We had an overseas flight which was over 8 hours. First, the seats are narrow and short with very little leg room. There was no entertainment system at all. We were only served a hot beverage once the whole flight. We had a little turbulence, but the flight was over 8 hours! I would not book with this airline again.	0
The worst airline to travel with. I have had baggage issues twice with this airline. The last one was in Oct. 2022 and they still haven’t refunded me for my broken bag which was due to their negligence. They don’t even give a single cup of coffee free in their flight. When it comes to refunding, they just take you round and round and they say oh the case is being escalated. For $250 USD I have been waiting for 6 months now. Unacceptable customer service at every level..	0
Flew from DUS-SVO-BKK. I am at a loss of words for the unfriendly staff. We had the feeling that they were annoyed about our presence in the plane. I have never experienced such unfriendly staff in my life. In addition 4 hours late without even explaining the delay. The Inflight-entertainment system itself was not bad. I would say slightly below average but still okay. The problem were the headphones. The headphones were so bad that you could not understand a word. So we could not watch a single movie during our 10 hour flight. At least no movie with sound. Food was standard. Neither good nor bad. I would not complain if the price would have been low. But it was pretty much the same as other airlines like Emirates or Etihad. 1/10 will never fly with Aeroflot again.	0
Washington DC to Mexico City. Horrible customer service - I will never fly with Aeromexico again. 3 hour flight delay from Dulles to Mexico City caused me to miss my connection. Customer service barely understood English and showed little concern. I found them rude and unhelpful. I ask my wife (who is Mexican and speaks fluent Spanish and English) to assist me in changing my return flight which was also on Aeromexico. The customer service person was not only rude to her as well but they provided inaccurate information regarding their own flight routes and hung up instead of trying to understand the request of their customer. Never again. I gave them one star because they are the only flight from Washington D.C. to Mexico City overnight direct.	0
Mexico City to Huatulco. I have nothing against the flight attendants but our experience with the Aeromexico airport crew and phone customer service reps last June have been nothing but horrendous. We had a connecting flight in Mexico City that was canceled because of a storm and I understand that it is out of your control. But what happened after that was the problem. We were by the gate when they canceled the flight, no one would help us rebook nor recover our checked luggages. All they had given us was a local number to call for instructions. Good thing I had friends who were able to speak Spanish and had phones with them but even with that we couldn't get help. The number they gave us was useless and we couldn't go in the carousel area since they would not let us in to just get our bags. After a couple of hours of running around the place and pleading with security so they can let us in to get our unsecured luggages in the middle of the arrival area, we were able to rebook a flight. Then they canceled that flight too and so we had to do everything all over again. It was a nightmare. On our way back, we were downgraded from business class to coach. So they apologized and compensated us with a voucher with an instruction that I can use it to upgrade any future round trip Aeromexico tickets. But the catch is that I should use the voucher within a year. Now, I called customer service and they are not helping me in any way. I have booked my flights and wanted to use the voucher but they are asking me to do a lot of things before I can use the voucher. This is just unacceptable. This second experience isn't helping my frustration with the first experience. I feel like I'm in Mexico City airport again trying to figure out what to do without anyone trying to help. It is just too much work for me to be able to use the voucher as what I have been told. To have an upgrade for any roundtrip tickets of aeromexico. I mean, I am not even asking for free flights. I am only asking to use the voucher that I have been given. I have not heard back from anyone.	0
Tuxtla Gutierrez to SFO via Mexico City. I few with Aeromexico in August in three segments from Tuxtla Gutierrez to SFO, and I wanted to get miles credit for these three flights. But the SkyTeam website and their customer service seemed incompetent to me and I am giving up trying to get the credit for these flights. I sent them a message by website too, but no response. On the other hand, I contacted United MileagePlus for Avianca flight (on the flight there), and I got the credit soon.	0
Athens to Brussels. The quality of the service is getting worse. I regularly pick this operator for my flights from Brussels to Athens and back. During my last trip not only we faced delay, but also the information provided was not accurate. They did not clearly communicate the reason of the delay and kept on stating that the flight will leave at 18.00 although it was 5 minutes later.	0
Seattle to Birmingham via Dublin. This was my first time flying through this airline. The transatlantic flight from Seattle to Dublin was delayed, awfully dirty and the seats wouldn't recline. The staff was impolite. The domestic flight from Dublin to Birmingham was worse it was delayed and the management was a mess. As I was getting through security, the airline updated the monitors that the flight had left, whereas they hadn't even started boarding. The also lost and damaged my luggage and were always unaccessible whenever I reached out. This flight was cheap and the food (on the transatlantic carrier only) was good but the pros are not worth the hassle.  Their organization is a mess and they are unreliable. If you do decide to fly through them, get travel insurance and cover your bases.	0
Philadelphia to Manchester via Dublin. This was one of the worst flights I have flown. We were unable to check-in online the night before and without i=forming us, we were given seats that didn't recline, for the 8 hr trip. The food was appalling. The return flight wasn't much better. After having the same issue with checking in, I called the airline to try and check in the day before so we wouldn't get stuck with bad seats again, and they informed us that even though we had an Aer Lingus Reference Number they couldn't help us because it was booking through Expedia. After getting to the airport and waiting at the gate, boarding time comes and an announcement is made that the flight is delayed because a crew member hadn't showed up yet. No updates were given, and a supervisor was loud with some of the passengers that were just looking for an update. You would think that Aer Lingus would have back up crew members. Unable to even board the plane, a full flight was waiting on the punctuality of a single crew member. After an hour of waiting the single missing cabin crew member shows up and we can finally board. The plane was freezing cold, I asked for a blanket two times from the flight attendant and never received one. Customer service is appalling, seats uncomfortable, plane was outdated and food disgusting.	0
We flew from Philadelphia to Dublin and on to Heathrow, return. The planes that carried us across the Atlantic (ASL Airlines) were vintage 1970s. My seat arm rest fell off. On the return flight, the seat backs were not attached to the metal frames and the seat cushion had not 'cushion' or springs or whatever makes them comfortable for 7 hours. The toilets smelled like urinals in some very dank Dublin pub - disgusting! The food was not edible. This was the worst airline experience we ever had - and that includes flying in countries that are not considered "first world." In addition, it is impossible to talk with someone at Are Lingus-1 hour and 45 minutes on hold with Irish music was enough to count as torture. Never actually talked to anyone. I even called the Dublin telephone number and got the same hold and music.  And they charged for water on the flight from Dublin to Heathrow - Really?	0
For an almost 2 hours flight to Bucharest from Berlin TXL we we're served a 20g pack of potato chips which was described as snack. Every airBerlin flight the "snacks" become smaller and smaller but this is too much. That bag of potato chips will cost anywhere less than 1 Euro and I think this becomes towards a customer humiliating. There are always the same unhappy stewardess-faces always looking like they can't wait to finish their shift and go home. Not to mention that at the airport we were sent in an improved Terminal with only two flights very crowded and absolutely no duty free facilities. I am fed up with this airline and I have given up my topbonus card after one year of bad experiences with them. I hope I will never have to travel again with them. The only plus I can give the flight was in time.	0
Barcelona to Montreal. Worst international flying experience! Seats are old and uncomfortable and jammed very close together. No TV screens or entertainment at all for an 9 hour flight. I later heard they had iPads for rent to watch a movie but we were not informed by the staff. We were unfortunate to get seats in the very last row facing the toilets which added an insult to an injury. Strong smell of urine through the flight, non-reclinable seat back, last in line to be served for anything. By our row no choice of food was left and what was offered contained nothing but load of cheap carbs - potato salad, pasta with nothing in it and bread so hard it felt like days old. The flight we booked was supposed to be with different airline but they flipped the airline on us for unknown reason. Feel cheated and very disappointed. The only good thing to say is about ground service. With extremely tight connection interval our bags made it to the second leg of the flight.	0
Toronto to Berlin. This was the worst overseas flight of my life. Horribly dated and uncomfortable seats, very poor beverage and food service, terrible seat positioning (right next to the back toilet, really?!) and overall a horrible decision.  Air Canada Rouge has been my worst experience so far, and I would not suggest it to anyone.	0
Toronto to Ft Lauderdale. Air Canada used to be great, with delightful service, great in-flight entertainment, legroom, and comfortable seats. When they realized that they have the monopoly and can charge whatever they want, they took the oldest planes from the main fleet, got rid of their IFEs, cut down on crew members, packed more seats onto the plane, and charged the same price as they used to with Air Canada rouge. They can't lose customers because a lot of people have no where else to go! I checked in early for my flight, on the app, but I received row 32, the last row on the plane. IFE weren't supposed to be an issue for me because they replaced it with mobile entertainment. Air Canada gave me an alert saying the service is unavailable on my fully capable product, running the correct version of iOS and the app. Ok, we don't have IFE, let's buy wifi. Right? Nope. 8.95 CAD/hour. I'm very disappointed with the services provided on Air Canada rouge.	0
Terrible customer service, change our flight schedule from early morning to midnight. Instead of finding an option I was asked if I just want a refund. Disregard whether customers has plan on the day of arrival, or has booked a hotel or rent a vehicle, Air Canada can just change the schedule without letting you know	0
So so bad! My flight in to NYC - even though I have confirmed my ticket months ahead of time. I ended up having a standby ticket? On my way back I've had to check my carry on and wait for it at the carousel. Staff were rude! Now I hate that airline and will avoid flying with them ever again.	0
Do not use this company. I just purchased two tickets for my wife and 7 year old daughter, and I paid extra money for seats that can seat right next to each other. But when she checked in and board airplane, the seats are not the same we're supposed to have. They had to sit separately. So I called Customer service and they said they don't care, there is nothing they can do. They did not say sorry and couldn't refund the money that I paid extra.	0
New York JFK to Buenos Aires via Mexico. This was by far the worst experience that I have. The customer service was the worst. I have no idea where they recruit their staff but they are very disrespectful. I checked my bag and I passed the weight limit by half pound. Well she said that I have to pay extra, but i have a carry on bag and i said i will put that half pound in my carry on. Then she said that she has to weight my carry on. At this point I was annoyed, not only because of the situation but they way she was telling me. Long story short I had to paid $260 dollar more to check in my carry on. The worst part is that she was chit chatting with her co-worker and laughing while charging my credit card. After all the procedure she get back to me with that poker face and said "by the way the flight is delay". I really doubt that the airline provided any customer service training to this people but I guess we have to start with an apology and not "by the way". I get to the gate and they starting to ask to check the carry on bag, and the funny part is that they didnt weigh any of those bags. I decided to ignore the situation and just wait for boarding, My nightmare didnt end, my seat was next to the exit so the attendant was explaining to us in spanish the rules and  when she finished she ask if we understood. I am Asian but my maternal language is spanish, I replied to her yes in spanish. She looked at me and repeated the whole thing in English again and I said, I speak Spanish so I know what you meant. She stared at me like 5 seconds and kept repeating the whole process in english so I just ignored her and closed my eyes, she woke me up and asked me again in english if i understood. The whole experience was horrible and disrespectful.	0
Los Angeles to Bogota via Mexico City. It was the worst experience I had with any airline. The customer service is the worst. Due to their bad service and lack of interest to help anyone, I missed 3 flights my total travel time was 33 hours instead of 16 hours originally planned. This occurred during my flight from Los Angeles to Mexico City and Bogota. This airline, never offered any help to accommodate me with a hotel during the delays. I really needed to sleep. And I wasn’t able to sleep at all during this ordeal. Not even food vouchers were given. I arrived ill due to the lack of sleep. This is something the consumer must be aware before choose an airline. The savings are absolutely not worth the painful experience.	0
Lima to San Francisco via Mexico City. I've traveled on many airlines and have never experienced such horrible customer service. The airplanes are old and decrepit .I had to use the restroom on a flight from Mexico City to San Francisco, it was an emergency. It was during the time they were serving drinks. Mind you, this has never been a problem on any other airline. They simply ask me to move into one of the isles- they push their cart and I can easily go by. This time, the rep told me to use first class. I was okay with this but the way he ordered it was obnoxious. I rushed all the way back (they were very close to the end of the plane). As soon as I walked into first class the most pretentious women I have encountered stopped me, and told me to go back and use the restroom reserved for my class!  I told her the other airline attendant had told me it was okay to use this bathroom. She literally backed me up into my area and shouted at the other airline attendant that no one was allowed to use those prestigous golden bathrooms. The original flight attendant finally made the room he could have made from the beginning and I was allowed to use the restroom. I have never been more upset on a flight. They had the cheapest prices and they are the worst.	0
Frankfurt to Athens. I am very disappointed in the service of Aegean Airlines. On my flight to Athens from Frankfurt I had to pay an extra fee of 60 euros to check in my cabin bag exceeding the weight limit by 2kg. I was not the only one getting this treatment. Not that the bag would have been bigger in volume than the one allowed, only it wasn’t the correct form but would have still fit the overhead compartment just fine. Also a couple of people who had bought tax free products at the airport and now had to check in their bags because the extra plastic/paper bag they were carrying also had to be in their cabin bag . The service onboard was standard and the flight arrived on time, all of which I couldn’t enjoy after the experience I had at the gate.	0
Rome to Athens. I pre booked my seat. It was close to an emergency exit. However I did require a seat belt extender. Instead of the matter being dealt with discreetly the air hostess as loud as she could said she cannot allow me to sit there if I require an extender because it means I am not fit. No that's not the case. Regardless she then proceeded to as loudly as she could going to every person in rows behind me asking if they are alone and are willing to swop seats because I am too big to sit by the emergency exit. I have never been treated in such a disgraceful manner by an airline. To top it off I was skipped when food and drink was being offered. I will never travel this airline again.	0
Dublin to Chicago. I was one of the unfortunate customers that was on the EI125 flight May 2nd. We were diverted to Milwaukee due to thunder storms in Chicago and the Captain and crew tried to keep us informed as much as they could. We sat on the runway in Milwaukee for 3 hrs waiting for the storm to pass but at that stage the crew could not fly it to Chicago so the deplaned us and we were told we would be looked after in the Terminal. When we got in there was one gentleman telling us they were printing forms with our options and he was going to collect the rest of the people off the flight. We never saw him again of Aer Lingus staff. We were left in the terminal to sort out our own arrangements.  I have been trying since yesterday to find my bag that was on that flight. I have been flying Aer Lingus for years and this is the worst experience I have had -  over 200 people in a terminal and not one Aer Lingus person to take care of them?	0
New York to Phuket via Beijing. Do Not fly Air China. I had read the bad reviews but chose to ignore them, boy was I wrong! First we missed our connection in Beijing due to Air China not landing or deboarding on time. We circled the airport for over 45 min then they didn't let us out of the flight for another 30+min. Because of this we missed our first day of vacation and we weren't able to stay at our first hotel. After being given the run around via multiple emails and phone calls, they refused to compensate our room. Then on the way back they delayed our layover over 4 hours, with no explanation! I've never experienced such flippant customer service. If I could rate them a zero I would!	0
London to Bangkok via Beijing. Do not ever fly this airline. Not only were my flights delayed, but my luggage was lost for several days, with Air China taking absolutely no responsibility, except for the first day on which they told me that the place was unbalanced so they took my suitcase off.  Unhelpful aircraft staff, even had an argument in the aisle in front of us, shouting!	0
Bangkok to Frankfurt via Chengdu. The worst flight I ever had. Air China is not even able to check through the luggage although the flight was booked from BKK to FRA. I had to immigrate into China - had to get a transit visa. I asked the Air China staff for assistance: Their answer: we have more important things to do. The ground service of Air China is not even existing - if at all they are able to speak a foreign language, like English, which is mostly not the case. The service onboard is better with the exception of the food that is inedible. My advice: never fly Air China! The flight price may be cheap - what you get for it is not worthwhile.	0
Victoria to Toronto. Extremely disappointed with Air Canada Rouge, and feel like we were tricked into using this carrier when booking our trip on Air Canada's website. Major complaints were that the seats are extremely small with no cushioning or padding, I'm a size medium woman, about 170lbs, 5'8" and I barely fit in the seats, my knees were definitely in the back of the poor guy in front of me. Also, on a 4.5hr flight, we were offered water/beverages only one time, and it took over 2hrs to get the drinks going because they were so slow to move their way through the plane. I wish they wouldn't offer the charged snacks/meals because it really makes the service extremely slow. Line-ups for the one washroom were epic, they allowed about 10 people to line-up at once so we were constantly being elbowed and stepped on as we barely fit in the seats and armrests are so tiny. Service from flight crew was okay, but they were more concerned with gossiping in the back then providing water and comfort to their passengers. Flight crew was constantly announcing in French and not English and was loud. Rouge player didn't work. Bought a $40 wifi pass that didn't work.  Dreading our next flight, also with Rouge unfortunately. Wish I could get a refund. Don't book with them!!	0
Bogota to Toronto. There was no Spanish speaking staff on the flight. I had to translate for the passenger seating beside me. The crew spoke a lot over the PA about things that were not important (creating memories, and other irrelevant information) and did not provide information like length of flight, temperature on arrival, etc. The pilot never greeted the passengers with information about the flight. They have an app for their entertainment system and the choices are outdated and extremely limited. There is no radio option to listen to varied music. The flight left in the evening and instead of offering a dinner, they offered a breakfast. I was starving when I went on board and I was offered only a candy bar and chips. Nothing till around 4 hours after and it was a breakfast choice. The ground crew were extremely disorganized on check in and boarding.	0
Montreal to Barcelona. The seats are quite uncomfortable and there is little to no leg room. When my girlfriend and I sat down, we noticed there weren't any screens on the seats. This came to a surprise, however, the staff informed us that there would be wifi on board to watch tv & movies during the flight. After takeoff, we inquired about the wifi and that it was not working. It was only then that they had mentioned we needed to download the app before takeoff, however, we could rent an iPad for $10 - although $10 is minimal in comparison to the cost of the flight, it's kick in the gut if you ask me. After dinner was served at 10:00pm, we would expect that the lights would have turned off. This was not the case. The staff did not dim any lights until 12:00am, and they proceeded to turn them back on at 2:00am to serve refreshments and breakfast. There was no personal overhead airvent, and it was left up to the staff to turn it on and off. I found myself cold, needing a blanket one minute and then so hot I'm sweating the next. I will pay the extra money to avoid Air Canada Rouge in the future.	0
Boarding processes excluded priority handling for Star Alliance Gold pax. Departing flight was delayed, causing an impossible connection for my onward journey. Upon arriving at YUL, deboarding was delayed first to cool the engines, then because the gate was being shared with another flight from the USA which had been given priority. As I was eager to make my connection, an Air Canada attendant suggested that I run ahead. When I did that, I was met with a gate agent who started yelling at me. They insisted that I return to the plane (which I did), they proceeded to take my boarding pass away and threatened to file a formal complaint against me even though I had followed the guidance of the Air Canada attendant. The gate agent continued to berate me in front of other passengers. After finally boarding my connecting flight, they did not manage to deliver my checked in items. The special (VGML) meals I was served were farcical in standard. The airline charges for everything on its domestic routes, and after paying for headphones the entertainment unit did not work properly or have full seasons of shows (only two or three episodes per season).	0
On the day of our flight, Air Canada moved us out of our preferred seating that we had purchased, without our permission. We were informed at the departure gates that the refund would be automatic since the change was made by Air Canada, but we have yet to receive any refund. Instead I had to apply for a refund, which will take up to 45 days. At the gates when I asked to change back to my preferred seats, I was told that I had made the change myself, the system had moved my daughter to a regular seat because she did not have a K-eta. Both reasons were preposterous. First, my daughter and I were travelling together. She is a minor and there is no reason why I would separate her from me so that she would sit in a regular seat among strangers. Second, when I said that I did not make any changes to the seating and that I had paid for the preferred seats, the staff at the counter then said that it was the "system" that did it. The story went as follows. We did not get a K-eta three hours before the flight, and therefore the change was made automatically. I also did not have a K-eta, but I was not moved automatically. By moving my daughter to a regular seat did not make her more able to travel to Korea without a K-eta. Regular or preferred seating, one needed the K-eta. I also learned that in the meantime they had sold the preferred seat to another woman. I asked that my daughter's seat be reinstated because we were the original buyers of the seat. I was told that since I could get a refund for my daughter's seat but not the other lady (she had used up her refunds), they would not reinstate my seat. As a result of Air Canada’s actions, both my daughter and I were inconvenienced with the regular seats while the other lady enjoyed the preferred seat at our expense. In other words, Air Canada has placed the other woman’s interest over ours. Is this their corporate policy? They then took 20 minutes to sort out the seating. I was suggested the last row of the plane, just in front of 4 toilets and the food preparation area. There was no other choice given to us unless we were prepared to be separated. I did not want to create a scene at the departure gate as we were already in the last hour before the flight. I reluctantly accept it because not to do so would cause further inconvenience with our travel plans. The seats turned out to be terrible and experience of the flight was excruciating for both of us. During the 12 hours flight, there was constant vacuum flushing of toilets, strong food smells emanating from the preparation area, a male crew member who talked non-stop in a loud voice, and a hysterical crying baby whose parents decided that the back of plane was a better area for her to calm down. Both of us did not get any sleep during the 12-hour flight. All in all, it was a flight from hell. The reason why we chose to pay for the preferred seats was to avoid the problems of being assigned to bad seats. However, Air Canada did not honor its contract with us. We had entered into a contract to fly on the preferred seats and Air Canada had unilaterally cancelled our contract.	0
Bangkok to Moscow 9 January 2015 flight 273. Awful customer service experience. The Aeroflot customer service team promised that they had found extra leg space seats as requested for my wife (dislocated her knee). When on board we found that they were not only normal economy seats but in fact were exactly the same ones that we had reserved previously (before her leg break). So not only was service unacceptable but also the staff seem to have > deliberately deceived us at the customer service and check in desks. I assume to move us on without having to do anything else. So they let the company down and of course passed the problem on to the flight attendants who also did nothing much to help. Very poor indeed.	0
Cancun to Los Angeles via Mexico City. This was the airline from hell. My flight from LAX to Cancun was canceled less than 24 hours before taking off because they were "no longer operating" and I couldn't get on another flight for another 6 hours from the original after being denied many times, a supervisor agreed to book another airline. When I landed in Mexico City for my connection the supervisor said it wasn't her problem and I needed to book another flight so I paid an extra $200 to get to Cancun to make the wedding I was going to. On the way back I had booked with The same airline again unfortunately & when I arrive to the airport they tell me my flight is overbooked! How is that possible when I paid for it? They put me on standby and tell me there's nothing they can do but give me food vouchers or airline vouchers. So she tells me instead of my 11am flight I can leave at 1:20 instead but my connecting flight in Mexico City won't leave till 720pm! So I ended up spending entire days in airports because of their stupid excuses and they gave me a "MasterCard" I can't even activate LOL because I have to call an international number & when I called the airline they told me I need to email customer relations - I thought I called customer relations! This is by far the worst airline and customer service I've ever encountered!	0
My husband and I were flying from Mexico City to Shanghai. The plane from Shanghai to Mexico City was extremely uncomfortable in economy class (by the way, do not pay for the emergency seats, they are the worst seats,) so we decided to upgrade to Premium economy to better our seats (around $6,000 pesos more). When we checked in at the airport, we were charged $1,800 Mexican pesos extras for 3 extra kilos as apparently Premium economy means nothing. You won't get any sort of benefits whatsoever, so if you are reading this, just be aware about the luggage requirements and avoid checking in your carry on. You will not find any sort of helpful staff neither at the airport nor via phone to help you understand, clarify, or reinburse any money regarding this issue. We bought the tickets thinking they were a good deal, at the end, we ended up paying way more than if we had bought a more expensive tickets through a different airline. I do not recommend this airline at all. I am a very dissatisfied customer and we will certainly not fly again through Aeromexico.	0
Return sector from Taipei to Frankfurt via Shanghai-Pudong, including an overnight layover in Shanghai. Check-in staff in TPE to my surprise told me that my suitcase cannot be checked through to FRA as PVG is "not an Air China hub, unlike PEK". Since the check-in staff did not work directly for Air China, I did not make a direct complaint, but this must be mentioned when booking a connection itinerary. The assumption when booking this kind of flight with both legs operated by the same airline is that bags will be checked through to your final destination! This meant that I had to clear customs and haul my suitcase into central Shanghai for the less than 24hrs layover. Furthermore, the transfer visa staff at Pudong was very rude. I did not have my full itinerary printed in this electronic day and age (just my confirmation number written down) and immigration staff insisted on seeing a copy of my onward journey (as I also didn't have my boarding pass for the onward flight because TPE staff could only check me in to PVG). No Wifi is accessible in Pudong Airport to travellers without a Chinese SIM card, meaning I was unable to access my booking on my phone/iPad, unbelievable! This meant that the immigration staff had to physically go to Air China to check the passenger list for tomorrow to see if I'm on it, making me wait 30 min at the counter. Service onboard is below average and smiles seem faked. The food and drinks offering is substandard with none of the alcoholic beverage offerings on other carriers. My IFE touchscreen was very hard to navigate (touch function almost broken), meaning that pausing a film when going to the toilet was not possible easily. Film selection very limited, outdated and often in Chinese. Advice: Avoid Air China stopovers like the plague, however tempting it might seem to explore Beijing or Shanghai! And avoid Air China in general if you have other choices. It's definitely worth spending an extra 100 bucks for service and comfort (especially since my layover costs amounted to this much anyway).	0
Beijing to Geneva. As Lufthansa and Swiss codeshare with air china, I was unfortunately booked on the return flight with Air China. Firstly they have rude customer service, the flight attendants make you feel that they are doing you a huge favour if you complain. I initially received an email saying that my flight type, had been changed from business to economy. When contacting Air China, I was informed that I would be flying with Air China, however there would be no flight miles on this sector. This is a joke, given that the ticket from Geneva to Xiamen and return cost CHF4400. I had selected the seat numbers during my booking and the seat numbers were clearly indicated in my flight itinerary. However, on my flight from Beijing, we were issued different seat numbers and I did not make a fuss since it was a late night flight and all i wanted to do was get back home. I did not have anything to eat, and fell asleep shortly after take off, I could not get the seat to recline 14A, but thought this was because I was tired. Later on about 2 hours after take off, I again tried with no success. Then i tried to switch on the TV, and called the flight attendant multiple times, they reset 4 times without any success. I approached the manager and initially he tried to refer me another flight attendant to assist. I refused his referral and insisted that he resolved the problem for me. He then informed me that he would try to reset the tv again, and would try to get the seat to recline. By this time it was about 6am in the morning, as we had departed 2am Beijing time. So no chair that reclined, nor a tv that worked. Feeling very frustrated i called the attendant again and told him that this was unacceptable. During all this time, I kept getting these looks, as if to say what do you expect us to do? Finally, he relented and said he would see if he could find me another seat, this was almost 5 hours later. From the onset, why didn't they just suggest this. All the passengers were asleep and i informed him that i didnt feel it would be right to wake the rest of the passengers. I changed 3 hours prior to landing, as I had a terrible backache, but will never fly with this airline again. Small seats in business class, tine screens if you seated in front seats, and more importantly nothing that works. So in effect i could have flown economy as i basically received the same kind of seat and very little assistance from the staff!? Even, my written complaint to the airline had fallen on a deaf ear. This is my first and last time flying this airline. This is the worst airline I have flown with and will refuse to fly with them again	0
We flew from Vancouver to Panama City, connecting through Toronto. Flying with AC Rouge was everything but a good experience. Their planes are quite antiquated. On the A321, from Vancouver to Toronto, the USB plug was not functioning and the seat wouldn't recline correctly. The seat pitch is ridiculously small. Don't expect a snack or a blanket. The light was on for the 5 hours of the red eye flight. The entertainment system needs serious revamping. Hardware is old and not responsive. Poor content doesn't help the touch lag or the offset discrepancy. On the plus side, the staff on that flight was very friendly. The flight from Toronto to Panama City was worse. There's no screen in this A319 configuration so we were asked to download a 80 MB application which proved to be useless since the wifi was not working. There was USB plug to charge your device anyway so you don't know if your phone wouldn't die in the middle of a movie. No snack was offered. Last, the staff was not so friendly.	0
Boston to Venice via Montreal. Our flight was delayed out of Boston and we ended up missing our connection. After a complete lack of information in Montreal we waited in line for an hour for what we though was rebooking our flights but turned out was just to issue us vouchers for a hotel and informed we had to call to change our flights. Missing our connection meant we lost a hotel in Venice and our train tickets the next day to Rome. There was a flight directly to Rome for less money that AC refused to put us on because we didn't book that flight. The Boston terminal is small, and has poor air conditioning.	0
My flight was delayed by more than 12 hours and they did not uphold the Canadian Air Protection rights I was deserving of. They were suppose to provide us with accommodation since it was an overnight flight and the delay was more than 4 hours, but they told us “we don’t offer that service” and we had to spend the night on the airport floor. I have had flight delays before, but I have never been treated so inhumanely. Please, please, pay a little more and go with a better airline.	0
Cancun to Vancouver via Mexico City. Boarded our flight from Cancun to Mexico city with no issue. Boarding our Vancouver bound flight, and this is where it all went to hell. As usual with Aeromexico, boarding started late. Flight was delayed by about 20 minutes because of it. However, when refuelling the plane, they miscalculated and had to start all over, delaying the flight even longer. After they finished we got the whole safety video and pre take off information, but we hadn't left the gate yet. Look outside, it's pouring, thunder, lighting, hail. It didn't look good. After about 40 minutes of no information, I got sick and tired of it, so I confronted the cabin crew to make some announcements, which they did eventually, in Spanish. Remember, this was a Vancouver bound flight, most people spoke English. After about three hours of little information, little water and no food, they cancelled the flight and deplanned due to bad weather and a fuel related issue. We all thought, well great, at least we will get a hotel. Just getting our exit tickets took about an hour because there were only two gate attendents trying to help over 200 angry passengers. To make matters worse, they said they wouldn't rebook us and we'd have to figure it out ourselves. They gave us a local number to call, only problem, we didn't have local cell phones. Sick and tired of the gate attendents only speaking Spanish, we went to the check in counters to try and rebook, only to find a giant queue of confused passengers. Turns out, the airport cancelled all their flights that night. So we stood in the line and about an hour and a half later, we got our new tickets for a flight in 2 days. To make matters worse we still had to collect our check in bags and find a hotel. 3hrs later, we got our bags and went to Aeromexico to find a hotel, only to learn that they will not be compensating is because the delay was weather related. Mind you, the captain told us the delay and cancellation was due to the fuel misshap. No matter what we said to their "customer service representative" they wouldn't budge. We were forced to spend two days in the airport with our bags and fellow passengers who also got screwed by Aeromexico because by the time we finished this while rebooking thing, all the hotels were sold out by other airlines. Every staff member we witnessed was nothing but rude to us. Also, the vast majority don't speak a word of english. Being an international airline, I would think speaking English would be important. I highly recommend not choosing this airline unless you want to be stranded in Mexico city with no fresh clothes, beds and food for two days.	0
Vancouver to Nicaragua via Mexico City. I've flown many different airlines and never experienced one as bad as Aeroméxico! Constant misinformation, horrible customer service and surprise fees! I Will never fly with Aeroméxico again. I was charged $188 each way to carry my surfboard! The max I have ever paid on any airline previously being $50.	0
Mexico City to New York JFK. I was shocked by the horrible, unprofessional, incompetent way that I was treated by Aeromexico during my recent flight. Their deception, misinformation and incompetence cost me 8,612 extra pesos! I should not have been treated this way. I arrived at the Mexico City airport in the early morning, hours before my flight. I checked in at Aeromexico's check-in desk. The clerk checked my printed ticket and my U.S. passport and confirmed them. I asked if there was anything else, and she said no, that I was good to go. She checked in my suitcase and gave me the receipt for my checked-in bag. Then I went to my gate and waited several hours until boarding. When boarding began, I stood in line and eventually reached the front of the line, expecting to be checked in and board the plane. The Aeromexico employee at the gate asked me for the stub from my Mexican immigration papers, which I signed upon entering the country. The Aeromexico clerk at the baggage check-in had said nothing about this stub when I asked if there was "anything else" I needed. When she indicated that there wasn't, I placed the stub into my suitcase, which she then checked in. The clerk at the gate told me not to worry, that all I'd need to do is go to the Immigration desk and sign another immigration stub. She told me to sign it, then come back to the gate — that I could then board at the gate with no problem. That turned out to be a lie — or at least, radical misinformation. At her direction, I ran to the Immigration desk, signed a second immigration stub, and paid a 500 peso penalty, then sprinted back to the gate, returning just minutes after I had left. Suddenly the clerk at the gate had completely changed her tune. "Sorry," she said, "plane's leaving. You can't board." I reminded her that she told me to go get the second immigration stub, return to the gate, and that I'd have no problem boarding the plane. The clerk brushed off my concern like it was of no importance and returned to chatting with a fellow employee. Upset, I went to the Aeromexico customer service desk. The clerk there told me not to worry, that this was no problem at all. "There's a 9:05 am.flight to JFK," she said. "Just go to the Aeromexico desk at L2 or L3, ask for the manager and have her switch you to that flight. It will be no charge."  But this turned out to be a lie too. I should have known something was up because the clerk refused to tell me her name.  When I sighed, she told me again: Just go to L2 or L3, talk to the manager, and get the free reassignment. "It's just a little bit of paperwork," she said. So I went to L2 and waited in line for 45 minutes to see the manager. When I got to the front desk, the clerk there said that if I wanted to get on the next flight, there would be a penalty - a 8,112 pesos. That's $453.65. "It's Aeromexico procedure," they said. In the end, I spoke with 8 Aeromexico employees, but none helped, including the customer service help line. They told me they had no power to process customer service matters.	0
Orlando to Dublin. They cancelled our return flight home and left us stranded for 5 extra nights. Directed us to their website which didn’t work. Spent over 6 hours on the phone and got “disconnected” over 12 tines. Was directed to go to the airport and they sent us away. The worst customer service imaginable. They are only after their bottom line and could care less about people.	0
The flight from Dublin to Lyon was rescheduled from Friday to Saturday due to bad weather conditions. On Saturday we had to leave at 11.40 in the morning. We waited 9 hours in the airport and in the end our flight was deleted without any reason. At the airport there wasn't the snow anymore and lot of flights left during the day without any problems, including Aer Lingus flights. I'm asking for compensation but I can't for bad weather conditions as this is not true. The assistance was very bad at the airport. Very bad experience.	0
I warn you do not fly with Air China, it's not worth the cheap prices. I normally don't give complaints because I always try to find the silver lining in situations, but I will this time. Though Air China had some of the best deals, it's only a good deal if everything goes smoothly. I ran into lots of trouble on this trip, and it ended up costing me much more than if I had flown with a more reputable company with better customer policies. I ended up paying lots of money for a very frustrating experience, not even able to take my trip after all. First of all, when I checked my E-ticket, it said the airlines was in "Terminal I" Once I got to Terminal 1, I found out, it was the wrong Terminal! The "I" of "Terminal I" stood for "International." Because of that I missed my flight. To rebook the flight, I was charged about $300. Shortly after rebooking, I found an error in my ticket. To correct the error, it cost me another $200. It also took a period of 5 hours to get all of this sorted! I was on an off the phone with them and had to call them back several times for emails they promised to send me but hadn't. I had my layover in Beijing Capital Airport. Thirty minutes after de-boarding, I realized I left my passport in the airplane seat pocket. After notifying staff (telling them my seat number too), they said they couldn't find it. (Which turned out to be false - several days afterwards, I received a call saying my passport had been found in the seat pocket) I thought they were talking to each other trying to figure out my passport situation. So that's why I followed them and once I realized what was happening, it was too late. They forced me through the security check and back onto an airplane flying back to Japan cause, "If no passport, no be in China!" they shouted at me. Once home, I called Air China to voice my complaint. It took about 2 hours. Rather than taking care of the problem themselves, they kept referring me to another number. In the end, I was fortunate enough to talk to a caring and reasonable agent. But they said there is little that can be done. I spent thousands of dollars, just to have 24+ hours of one frustrating experience after another. I understand that part of it was my fault but also, doesn't everyone make mistakes? I feel Air China has no mercy helping customers with their troubles instead, seems they prey on the problems as a way to bring in more income for themselves. I definitely do not recommend Air China!	0
Los Angeles to Xian via Beijing. Worst airline ever, our flight was canceled minutes prior to boarding and there was no communication. I approached a staff member and was told there was a slight delay and should be boarding soon but when I turned around to look at the plane it was gone and still no communications to the passengers. 20 minutes past boarding time the plane disappeared from the gate and still no word was past to the passengers. 1 hour after the boarding time the staff suggested we reschedule our flight, a suggestion and not notification we had to. finally after an hour and a half past boarding time we were told to follow a staff member and once we got about 100 feet from the counter the staff member disappeared leaving us lost on what to do. We returned to the ticket counter and was told to collect our luggage and to come back tomorrow to re-book the flight.	0
vNagoya to Vancouver. First time flying Air Canada Rouge - will never fly them again. Our leg over to Japan, we flew Air Canada, but Rouge on the return. The bulkhead section leg room was very cramped. My husband is 6'3" and that is why we upgraded to preferred economy and paid extra to sit in these seats, we anticipated much more leg room, you couldn't even stretch out your legs at all, we would have been better with a regular seat. The dinner was disgusting. Have attached a photo, but not even sure what that dark rectangle thing was in my food, it looked inedible. The breakfast sandwich was disgusting. The seats were so thin.  There were no TV screens in seats, but you could rent an IPAD for $10, I did not need to rent, I had my own. The movie/tv selections were from years ago and not that many options to choose from. And the wifi connection was poor, took several attempts to get the app to open and load the movies. No charging ports. Flight attendants. I had 2 kids behind me that kept kicking the seat. Finally I called a flight attendant and asked if they were traveling unaccompanied, (because I didn't see and adult) I explained what was happening and she looked behind me and said, "They're going to sleep now" - not they are not, they were just kicking my seat. They did it again later and I just turned around and gave them a look...they didn't do it anymore. Overall this was the worst flight ever, domestic and International. Air Canada Rouge, you have to do better....much better!	0
Kelowna to North Bay. Staff was good and flight service was pleasant. My beef is with the seating and lack of entertainment system. The seats are so close that anyone over 5.5 ft tall is jammed in like a sardine. Finally after 5 flights I was able to get the Rouge player to work on my wife's note book. The movie selection is poor and it's much more cumbersome than the in seat players from before. This was my last Rouge flight.	0
The interior appeared to me as if not updated since the 1970's, there is no built-in entertainment systems, and the food/drink service was horrendous. They have a wifi entertainment system accessed through personal devices however, this never worked and numerous people questioned the crew regarding the system and were told the system doesn't work when there are too many people on board.  On an 8.5 hour flight, dinner was a small chicken dish and breakfast was a piece of bread. Alcohol is not included with meals when I asked for a full can of ginger ale I was told "We don't give the whole cans." When I then finished my ginger ale and requested another one, I was told that I would have to wait until the cart came back around in a couple hours. My return flight was even longer, the entertainment system didn't work, and the service was poor.	0
Upon arrival from Cleveland, I began my layover until the scheduled 10:05 Pm departure. However, by shortly after 6Pm they were already warning of what turned out to be constant further delays until a scheduled 12:25 the next day. They began boarding us shortly after the rescheduled departure delay. We sat in a very full plane on the tarmac until actual departure at 2:47 Am. During the entire series of delays both in the airport and on the plane Air Canada gave us nothing including no reason for the delay. Their response to my complaint is that the reason was unscheduled mechanical problem of undefined nature.	0
We were travelling from Cancun, Mexico to Boston USA, via Toronto , Canada and there was 6 hours lay over in Toronto (YYZ). Our flight was at 9 pm from Toronto to Boston, the incoming flight was showing delayed and supposed to arrive at 9:52 pm from New York but they were showing our flight was on time till 8:40 pm then suddenly announced flight was cancelled due to weather which was outright lies. They just can not blame the weather to avoid taking care of the passengers when flight between our destination was taking off and landing albeit with some delay. On top of that uncivilized staff and threatening passengers	0
We flew from Atlanta through Toronto to Calgary on March 5, 2023. Our first flight was delayed well over an hour and the second one was 1.5 hours (almost all Air Canada flights delayed). There were no weather issues or other explanations offered to anyone. Also, while attempting to check-in online we realized they had not seated us together even though we had booked these flights 2 months prior. The only way to get seated together online or at the airport was by paying a seat upgrade fee, per person, per flight. Air Canada counter person also forced me to check a bag even though my luggage met the criteria for carry on. On both flights we noticed many others around us also separated from each other so among ourselves we moved around til everyone was seated together.  We were also bumped from our second flight since an earlier flight had been cancelled, causing us to take a later flight and arrive home 1.5 hours later (at 1:30 am). I realize extreme patience is needed to travel these days but Air Canada makes travel a nightmare.	0
By far the worst airline experience I've had. 3 of my 5 flights were delayed, causing me to miss several hours of my vacation, and eventually the final leg of my trip. The gate agents were rude, and refused to answer even the most basic question. My new luggage, purchased brand new at my destination and marked fragile, came back broken and looking as if it were a decade old, it's contents destroyed. I found the food was basically inedible.	0
Guadalajara to Monterry. We had the worst experience with Aeromexico with our flight from Gaudalajara to Monterrey on 23rd July. In the airport we were faced with a huge line to check in and it was moving incredibly slow. We only had to check in our baggage as we had already checked in in the system. There was no baggage-drop line. After we had queued for more than an hour and we finally reached the counter, the staffer demonstrated the worst service I've ever experienced. It turned out that our two suitcases each exceeded the permitted weight limit on 23 kg with 200 grams. It is normally not a problem, as I in two seconds relocate some of the content from my check-in suitcase to my hand baggage but they refused to let us do so, unless we went to the very back of the line. This would mean that we would miss our flight. Instead we had to pay MXN 1800 each (ie in total MXN 3200) for the overweight.  It is a significant off-market and burdensome condition not to be allowed to repack the suitcases in order to comply with the allowed weight limit. We will never use this airline again!	0
San Antonio to Puerto Vallarta via Mexico City. The lack of customer service is why I will never fly them again. We had originally booked our trip on March 2, 2017 and picked our dates and flights based on the family budget for our vacation. In May we received notice that the return flight was cancelled and come to find out there were no flights with them back at anytime that day. So we could either fly back with someone else and we could stay another day. After looking over the options the cheapest was to stay another day. I understand that this can happen, but with any other airlines they would try to compensate the customer because of the issues. After trying to contact them, found out that in order to get an answer the only option was through email with a 5 day response time. As a group we were just hoping that they might at least pay for our baggage since it would not cost the airlines extra money and it would help us by paying some of the cost we were having to pay out. By the time they finally answered it was to say no, but that they were sorry and really hoped to get our business back. We have flown with other airlines and they moved our flight by 15 minutes and gave use $25 vouchers that could be used for future flights or our baggage. So even with all of this we went and when checking back in, the website would not allow us to add baggage to 4 of our guest as it showed they already had paid baggage, so we add the 2 extra. However, when we got to the airport, it only showed the 2 bags. So now instead of the $20 we have to pay $25. However, when we went to pay because of the currency exchange we had to pay $30 and they were not willing to honor the $20 we would have paid because of their website issues. This does not even cover that the plane looked as though it was going to fall apart at any moment and since they do not seem to do compensation you would think they could pay for upgrading their planes.	0
Quito to New York via Mexico City. Aeromexico refunded my ticket without letting me know and for no reason. The night before my flight, I received an email from them to check in online, so I did not suspect anything was wrong. Upon arrival at the airport, I was told that my ticket had been refunded and was therefore no longer flying with them that day. I asked why and they couldn't give me an explanation, no one knew why. When I told them that I had received an email from them just the night before, the customer service agent told me, "Well maybe if you would have checked in online we would not have refunded your ticket." He then suggested that I fly tomorrow, which would cost three times the original ticket. After an hour of talking to multiple people, they told me I would be able to fly that day I just had to pay for the ticket. However, their machine would not accept my credit card and I could not take out an efficient amount of money from the ATM to cover the cost, and they refused to take a card over the phone from a family member. So I was unable to get on the plane, and had to re book, which I did so with a different airline.	0
I am so disappointed to have to write this review of Aer Lingus. I fly regularly with them 3-4 times per year, but now I will have to reconsider. I had no success in trying to change the date of a return flight, despite availability on the return flight I wished to avail of. I called the company and they refused to do it over the phone. In addition, I tried through their online system which would not permit it. At this point, the service experienced was highly frustrating. Having wrote to "Guest Services, which is their inappropriately branded customer complaint department, they provided me with a three line vague response that didn't correspond to my complaint in any way. I found this experience bordering on arrogant. Having returned an email to them outlining this, they chose not to reply. I tried to engage the company on social media, no reply either. When I had a great experience with Aer Lingus about two years ago, I wrote to the company outlining how grateful that I was. At that time I had backspin and they upgraded my seat to accommodate me. Within hours, I had received two emails from the company about how delighted they were. On this occasion however, there wasn't a word from the company for five days after my email was sent, and the customer services rep on the phone was short and unwilling in any way to help me. I will not fly with Aer Lingus again!	0
Shanghai to Melbourne. Was due to fly from Shanghai to Sydney on Qantas recently but due to mechanical issues we were placed on an Air China flight instead. It was horrific from start to finish. Rude and unhelpful check-in staff, rude and abrupt staff at gate, flight attendants were not friendly and avoid the food at all costs as it looked very old and re-heated quite a few times. The seats were very uncomfortable and the plane was an old and dirty one. The only small thing I was grateful for was that they had a very limited choice of movies in English which at least passed the time. Even if I was offered a first class free ticket anywhere on Air China I would decline. Do not use this airline at all.	0
This was my first flight with Air Canada rouge and the worst flight experience. We boarded the aircraft facing an over 8 hour transatlantic flight. Shortly after boarding, the flight attendant made an announcement that there is no running water in any of the lavatories. Also, there were no IFE monitors in the seat backs. Passengers had the option to rent an ipad for an additional $10 or download their app and watch on your own device. This had to be done prior to boarding.  Naturally, hundreds of us were trying to download at the same time. Therefore, it took a very long time, just to realize that the movie selection was sparse and terribly outdated.	0
Our flight was scheduled to leave at 8:55pm but we got delayed until 10pm due to bad weather, then it was canceled. The staff was unpleasant and practically shooed all of us across the airport to customs. We finally got a rebooked flight for 7:50am the next morning. We reached the hotel at midnight and got little to no sleep. Bottom line, the service was horrible and their crew need to return to school. This was my first and last time flying with Air Canada. I purchased their Wi-Fi, it took more than half the four hour flight from Vancouver to Toronto for it to start functioning.	0
Excellent flights both ways with Adria Airways from Manchester to Ljubljana. Staff friendly but unobtrusive. Leg room far better than most economy flights, seats comfy and plenty of storage space. Flights on time, quick and efficient boarding and disembarking, smooth take offs and landings. All in all a very pleasant experience.	1
Two short hops ZRH-LJU and LJU-VIE. Very fast on CRJ 90. Seats comfortable and crew was fine. Ground services good and lounge was quite nice.	1
Flights from LJU to ZRH and back all on time. In Economy class was served just coffee tea an water but it's fine for one and a half hour flight. Very friendly and helpful cabin crew members. Very clean and comfortable cabin on CRJ900 aircraft.	1
London Gatwick to Ljubljana and Ljubljana to Vienna in Business Class. Delayed slightly at Gatwick but that happens. Otherwise very good flights. Cabin crew friendly and welcoming ensuring that you were okay - without being too pushy and forward. Short flights and light meals/snacks served.	1
Domestic flight Accra-Tamale. 1hr flight. One time in both directions. Water, juice and snack (fish or meat pie, savoury biscuits) provided on this short flight (more than you get on BA domestic/European flights three days). Friendly and very polite cabin crew. Marvellous captain who gave great information about the flight. Joint venture between Hainan Airlines (China), Hahn Airways and Ghanian investors. An excellent service which makes domestic travel much easier in Ghana	1
Santiago to Buenos Aires. Excellent. No problems at all. Will fly again. Great staff at both airport and plane crew, clean aircraft, comfortable seat for economy class flight departed on schedule and arrived 10 minutes before.	1
My first experience with this regional airline on a short hop from Point-a-Pietre to Melville Hall. Very pleasant and relaxed flight, nice staff and decent leg and hand luggage space. Will be happy to fly with them at any time again.	1
Excellent flight, good service with hearty meal (starter main course dessert tea and coffee) Duty service on board. A generous pitch for economy class seats. Note the delay at departure due to the closure of Orly airport and the flights diverted to Paris CDG.	1
Paris to Algiers. Very good flight, excellent catering, clean plane, but crowded. The cabin is spacious for a 737, room for the legs, comfortable seat. Very good meal for a 2 hour flight. The crew is listening. Only complaint, the windows were dirty.	1
We flew business class (club condor) from JFK on Feb 21 and returned on Feb 28. Great experience. Airbus 330-200 was clean and comfortable. Both flights left on time. Crews were first-rate. Great bargain. Highly recommend it.	1
Flew four times over the course of a month internally around Argentina (EZE-El Calafate El Calafate-Trelew Trelew-EZE EZE-Iguazu) and was very happy with service. Check in was prompt and staff were friendly and bilingual. Never experienced any delays in fact we were actually moved forward from a 6 hour change at EZE to a flight departing 5 hours sooner for no extra charge. Snacks and drinks served in all flights and despite the 737-7 seats being noticeably more cramped and less comfortable than the -800 I'd certainly recommend.	1
Travelled from Madrid to Buenos Aires in May as the starting point of my South-American holidays. Reasonable prices and a remarkably good service all along the flight. There was a wide range of food to choose including delightful Argentinean beef. Check-in was fast and simple and the flight had no delays at all.	1
Even though Aerolineas Argentinas has received too many complaints from customers recently my flight from Sao Paulo Brazil to Buenos Aires Argentina on March 1 2014 in Premium Economy Class was great and I have no complaints. The flight was on schedule the flight crew were polite and helpful. Aerolineas Argentinas' premium economy class is the same as most US companies' domestic first class. The seats are J seats very comfortable and the food in this class was also a great sandwich yoghurt and a chocolate muffin. Compared to service in the same route provided by Brazilian companies I have flown and comparing also the price Aerolineas Argentinas Premium Economy class is far better in service and mainly in seat comfort!	1
I took three flights in November. Buenos Aires (AEP) to Cordoba Cordoba to Mendoza and Mendoza to Buenos Aires (AEP). They were award tickets through Sky Team (Delta) points. I was a little apprehensive after reading the comments here but in my case the flights all left close to on time and the aircraft were nearly new. Seating was comfortable and space was adequate. On each flight there was a beverage service and small snack box.	1
Tucuman-Buenos Aires-Tucuman. Two good flights the first on a Boeing 737-700 departed on time and arrived 15 mins early. Flight service is efficient and cabin crew very friendly. Totally recommended.	1
Buenos Aires-Iguazu Falls return. Two good flights the first on a Boeing 737-700 departed 10 mins early and arrived 15 mins early. Flight service is efficient and cabin crew friendly. The return flight on an MD-88 old but in good condition quiet and comfortable with a friendly and helpful cabin crew with the flight arriving at Aeroparque (AEP) 10 mins early.	1
Salta-Puerto Iguazu domestic flight operated by Austral. Flight a Embraer 190 with personal entertainment with TV series and documentaries and some CD's. The entertainment system failed twice but the crew reactivated it quick. Did not expected entertainment on a domestic flight. The crew offered a sandwich with a drink. Good legroom at emergency exit but the normal seats also offered good legroom for this short flight of 1.5 hrs. Departed 2O mins early and landed 40 mins early in Iguazu.	1
I have travelled several times with Aerolineas. Buenos Aires-Rio De Janeiro and Montevideo. Domestically I have flown between Buenos Aires and Mendoza Cordoba and Salta. I only have praise for the staff and organisation of this airline. I have encountered polite efficiency from check in staff and air crew the aircraft were clean and I experienced no delay or problems with the flights.	1
Best airline in Russia! Very nice staff, comfortable seats (I don't ask much, I mean this is coming from a girl who drives tanks), good service and power supplies, anything you can possibly ask for, enough room for my single bag, and even more room. Great service, good crew, wonderful meals, and so much more!! Ground service, I was pushed around a lot, but that isn't the staffs' fault. I don't remember turning on my in-flight entertainment system, I was too busy playing World of Tanks Blitz with the incredible WiFi.	1
I was very impressed with the staff. Many thanks to the Aeroflot representative Nina at Larnaca, who was extremely professional, friendly and genuinely caring for her passengers. The cabin crew were outstanding as well, especially the flight attendant Asiya and the purser Irina. They did everything to make people onboard happy.	1
London to Moscow on brand new A350-900. I must say I’ve experienced one of the best business class hard products in the world. Amazing suits with doors, featuring a huge and easy to navigate IFE screen with lots of movies and music, super comfortable lie-flat seat, lots of storage space, and great touches, such as a personal wardrobe, and a locker with a mirror. Staff were amazing, food was good (although I think Aeroflot still has a room for improvement here, especially if it wants to become a 5 star airline), and ground service was quick and efficient. All in all, Aeroflot’s A350 is definitely above and beyond any competition from other European carriers.	1
Had a really nice flight with Air Arabia. Great seat pitch, comfy seats and easy process all the way. Cabin was perfectly clean and crew sufficiently attentive. It was my first time on Air Arabia but it will not be the last	1
Aeroflot refunded fully the ticket costs by clicking only only button. The process was easy and fast. My flight was not cancelled it’s just due to the new quarantine rules in the country of arrival I had to cancel the ticket. I was surprised and please to see how easy and fast the refund process is. Other airlines offer vouchers or refund only 30% of the ticket price whereas Aeroflot did it  on their website and refunded the full fare paid. I am very pleased with the service and would be happy to book again.	1
Lyon to Moscow via Delhi. Fantastic customer services. I had a cancelled flight with another operator so missed my long haul, called the free helpline and the service was excellent and every easily resolved. I have flown a few times with Aeroflot and have always been very surprised at how good and easy the customer services are. Thankyou	1
London to Dubai via Moscow. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for the service provided from staff when buying our ticket at Heathrow Terminal 4. The service is second to none. When we got to Dubai was brilliant as per your advice, we are welcomed from the immigration and no trouble at all. We cannot thank you enough and staff at Heathrow are an assets to Aeroflot. Definitely will visit Moscow next time with your company!	1
Seoul to Busan. First time with Air Busan and it was great. Price, App, check in, employees, service,luggage and on time. At the check in I was offered an earlier flight, no fee. There were no problems with this airline and trip. Recommend.	1
CPT-GBE GBE-JNB. First flight a clean Bae146 in very good condition half empty with loads of leg room. Food excellent for an airline and service find. Second flight on an equally clean ATR72 with equally good snacks. All flights on time. Much prefer them to SAX or Airlink!	1
My family flew to Daegu from Gimpo. From check-in to boarding, service rendered by all staff were efficient and excellent. Cabin was clean and seats were usual economy class comfy. On our return flight from Daegu to Gimpo, we were late due to traffic and could not check-in thru self serve kiosk. We had barely 15 mins prior to flight departure. Approached counter staff for assistance. First thing the staff did was radioed the Captain while processing the checking in and printing of boarding passes. An agent came over to escort and assisted us throughout the procedure to ensure we boarded the plane without further delay. All these were completed within 15 mins and flight departed on time. Our biggest compliment is towards the Captain for both flights. Journey was smooth and landing was perfect which you dont even feel the plane has landed. Flew with many major top 10 airlines in the world but never had this landing experience ever before. Cabin Crew rating, great and comparable to top airlines! Keep it up and will definitely choose and fly Air Busan on all my destinations where served by Air Busan.	1
Fantastic Service. Booked from Australia for Jo'burg to Maun flight. Kept great communications for any changes and even transferred me on a SA flight no extra charge for my Kasane-Jo'burg leg when I explained about connection time with my Qantas flight due to schedule changes without having to be asked and emailed me back a new booking. Great service nice snack on a short leg clean modern plane on time friendly ground staff. I hear things might have been different a few years back but certainly my experience was very good and would fly with them again.	1
In August Johannesburg to Maun and Kisane to Johannesburg. Both flights were spot on time. Service on board was fine with drinks and light snacks served for the roughly 2 hour flight in each direction. Aircraft's were in good shape and the seats comfortable for this type of trip. Check-in in Jo'burg was easy and very quick. Check- in in Kisane was a breeze as the airport is tiny. All in a good experience and a great way to enhance your Botswana experience.	1
We were in Jeju flying to Busan then connecting to Gimpo. I noticed our flight was delayed and we may miss the connection. I queried this with ground staff. Within 16 minutes our flights were changed (at no cost), 4 people's luggage located, dragged across the airport, by tiny female ground staff, identified and reloaded then we were seated in row 1 of the airline and off to Gimpo. Totally amazing. I am still astounded that this happened. Plus a refund on our original flight. Congratulations Air Busan. If I could I would fly this airline regularly - customer service appears to be top of their list.	1
What a nice little airline! Air Astana provides economy passengers with a surprisingly generous amenity bag which was a nice touch. Cutlery was real metal (rare in economy!) The food was really good and the staff were friendly. This is how an airline should be run! Well done guys.	1
It was an amazing experience on all the 4 flights with Air Astana (IST-ALA-DEL and DEL-ALA-IST). Seats were very comfortable with enough leg space. Food was fresh, delicious and filling with lots of options (if you book pre-meal). Airline staff was exceptionally helpful and caring, they were just a bell away. Definitely value for the money.	1
I experienced exceptional customer service from the ground staff who checked in our baggage was professional and exceptional customer orientated. Not only she helped with our special request (which she could easily deny as per rules and which required an extra effort from her side) moreover, she went beyond that. She send an email to the Air Astana representative in Georgia asking for assistance, which we never asked for.  She even accepted a slight extra bag weight and wished us a pleasant flight. Airbus 320 Neo - nice aircraft with comfy chairs. Good selection of movies, would be cool to have some podcasts though! Overall flight was good, rest of the staff did well also.	1
Paris to Phuket via Moscow, economy class, Dec 4th 2019. Frequent Flyer with Aeroflot for nearly 3 years now, all I can say is that I'm fully satisfied with them. Swift priority check-in and security check in Paris via dedicated lanes for Frequent Flyers. Lounge access. Fly Attendants very welcoming, helpful and genuine. Space + seat (front row) and economy seat with good width (18') and pitch (32') - Aeroflot is one of the very few Airlines to still give 18 inches width (most nowadays give 17" or less). Moscow Airport is quite good, the various lounges for Frequent Flyers / business passengers are really excellent. Arrived on time and relaxed to Phuket. Had only once in 3 years a delayed luggage (was delivered 48 hours latter to my door in Paris, free of charge to me). Overall an excellent Airline and I strongly recommend Aeroflot.	1
Gimpo-Jeju and Jeju-Gimpo. One of the best budget airlines I have flown with thus far. Air fares were cheap. The seat was really comfortable for such a short distance and legroom room was really spacious (more space than SIA). Beverages were served despite the short flight and FAs were very friendly. Airport staff very polite when we were checking in. Definitely fly with this airline again in the future.	1
I recently flew Gimpo - Jeju and Jeju - Busan and what a great experience! Fares were cheap included baggage and when I changed my flights to spend more time in Jeju I only had to pay the fare difference. The seats were the same pitch as Qantas (31") flights departed close to schedule and drinks were served despite the short flight time. The only slight criticism I have is that their website is a bit tricky parts of it rely on Flash which may be why I couldn't get an English version to load on my mobile device also whenever I tried to put my passport details in I got an error - if this happens try selecting "No passport" this worked for me. I'll definitely choose them again if I'm flying their routes - great effort!	1
PUS-CJU B737 Short flight from us an to Jeju Island. Left and arrived on time. comfortable seating. No food served; just a 50cc bottle of water handed out. No inflight entertainment.	1
Thoroughly enjoyed flight from Nur Sultan (Astana) to Frankfurt with Air Astana Sunday 14th Feb 2021, I was travelling from Almaty to Frankfurt via Astana. First leg economy, second leg business. The service on both flights was very good and the food and drink outstanding. Tasty sandwich on the first domestic leg and given plenty of choice and excellent presentation of starter and main course on the international flight. Good Job Air Astana.	1
I have been using Air Astana on various domestic and international routes for 15 years. I have seen great improvements in this time from the early days. Not only in the quality of the aircraft and facilities but especially in in the cabin services. My recent flight this month highlighted this. Though I travelled economy I found the cabin staff very attentive and helpful. They were polite and supportive and prompt with any requests. The food was excellent, it was breakfast but hot, tasty and filling. The amenities packs are now eco friendly. They contain all those items that one requires on a journey of 3 hours or longer. They look good too. It was a new aircraft that was very clean, with comfy seats and was equipped with an excellent entertainment package. My only concern was travelling during these difficult times and the flight was full, understandably with the reduce number of flights scheduled. The in cabin safety brief, which is excellent and worth watching in all three languages, has had an amendment to relate to the latest pandemic requirements. The cabin crew enforced these rules without fear or favour in a very polite and professional manner. Keep up the good work Air Astana, you are my favourite airline.	1
Almaty - Saint-Petersburg is my favourite route. Flight was on time. Aircraft was brand new A320NEO (2 months old). Service was excellent, food was very good, choice of beverages perfect. Now airline using eco packs for amenity kits and it looks so good! And also inside of the kit they even put neck pillow, because flight was longer than 5 hours.	1
I was flying from Prague to Cairo via Moscow, the staff are professional and nice, good value for money, food was nice , cabin was clean, Aeroflot improved a lot.	1
FUK-PUS return on an aged 737-400 clean and offering reasonable leg space. Check-in courteous despite I arrived pretty late. No inflight service for such a short flight they served orange juice but it was not necessary to do so if fares go lower. They have an interesting selection of duty free shopping on the plane it's worth trying it. Uneventful trips and luggage arrived safe and sound. I'd wish they offered more routes into Korea from Fukuoka. Very user-friendly website that allows to catch good fares and per it's seat selection. Flying BX was a nice surprise.	1
Very good considering the fares. I even wonder when they serve drinks on a 50 minutes flight (Seoul - Pusan). I'd rather have a cheaper ticket.	1
Very good friendly and uncomplicated service. Like the fixed prizing. Makes you wonder why it has to be so stressful travelling in Europe with the likes of Ryanair etc. Would always choose Air Busan again.	1
Flight from Moscow SVO to Paris CDG, approximately 3 hours long. Hassle free boarding. Very attentive cabin crew. Clean cabin. FAs kept working with passengers throughout the flight. The seats are wide and comfortable, uncomparable with pitiful masquerading of business class by other European airlines. Full scale lunch: scallops with cucumber spaghetti and salmon with wild rice were sublime. Grand cru champagne and a variety of wines. Overall impression: very robust high-quality product from Aeroflot, exemplary for other European carriers.	1
GMP-PUS-GMP. Very good fast efficient and friendly staff. At GMP ground handling done by Asiana so all the traditional quirks of this great airlines. Served water and OJ on this very short flight.	1
Kuala Lumpur to Almaty. I credit Air Astana for their superior service on a recent flight from KUL to ALA last Tuesday 1st October. The service received on the flight was second to none, where the team leader provided a first class service during the the 7 hour flight. The quality of the main meal, wine and snack was excellent. I know Air Astana has received some criticism in the past but it was one of the best experiences I have had when flying. They made you feel welcome and special from start to finish.	1
Washington DC to Moscow. Very pleased with this airline. In-flight food / service / entertainment was top notch and exceeded my expectations. The aircraft was also new with generous leg room. Thanks Aeroflot!	1
Seoul to Minsk via Moscow. I had a booking that involved two airlines and three layovers, and when I came to check in in the city of origin, it turned out I needed a visa to make the first layover. A visa I didn't have. Aeroflot (the second airline) agreed to take my luggage from the first airline so that I wouldn't need to go through passport control and pick up my luggage and then check in again to continue my journey. I will never forget their kindness. Moreover, on the second leg of my journey I had a problem with my ticket (bought through the agent, not from the airline) and the manager Andrei in Seoul check in desk went the extra mile to call the agent on my behalf and try and solve the problem, and in the end helped me to buy a new ticket all the way being calm, supportive and professional. The more I fly Aeroflot, the more I feel secure that I will always be taken care of.	1
Kuala Lumpur to Almaty. I would like to express my deep gratitude to the crew of KC936 at the 25th August for their good work in conditions of prolonged turbulence. The stewardesses, in spite of the shaking, carried out the service, organize food and drinks. The food was excellent. Service was on top! Thanks to the pilots and the entire crew for the excellent flight.	1
Just flown Dublin to Alicante. Couldn't find a fault. Very pleasant staff on ground and in the air, but I still think hold luggage costs are are pure theft.	1
Vladivostok to Moscow. Very pleasant surprise, one of the best flights I've recently had. Aircraft was a bit dated but very comfy with a decent legroom. Being 6'3" i didn't find it uncomfortable on 8 hours flight. The food is great, drinks selection could be better but nevertheless was OK. Toothbrush as well as slippers and eye-masks were provided which made the flight much better.	1
Nur Sultan to Shymkent. Extremely nice experience. Food and drinks served on short flight all included in the ticket price. Cabin crew very friendly and professional.	1
Aegean Airlines will remain always my first choice and my favorite airline. The best Airline in Europe without any doubt. Cabin crew are so helpful, patient and supportive. Please keep up the excellent work and I hope that Aegean will make long haul flights soon.	1
Moscow to Athens. Aeroflot seems to be one of the very few remaining airlines to offer a real business class product with special seats in short haul flights. Service is refined (I was even offered a tablet with films downloaded ) and you really feel the difference compared to the usual slightly improved economy class product. All this at very competitive prices . Congratulations Aeroflot.	1
Long family flight with 9 month old baby. Great flight. Thank you very much for your excellent service and attention to infants! We flew with a baby from Madrid to Bangkok with a transfer in Moscow. At all stages the staff were friendly and very caring towards our kids. Docking time in Moscow was only 1 hr 20. In the transit zone we were actively driven up and let everyone forward among a huge crowd. Very carefully as all half asleep thought slowly. I want to note separately that the quality of food even in economy class is at a high level and not some kind of plastic like many airlines have. If coffee then only natural not instant and cheap Nescafe. Tasty tea. I often fly and I have something to compare. All kids are given packages with toys - this is very nice! When we flew from Moscow to Bangkok the stewardess herself offered to transfer to the free lane where there were no seats in front which turned out to be much more comfortable :) At all stages of the flight there were modern and comfortable aircraft. Clean and well maintained at a low cost. Aeroflot - you are just super!	1
St-Petersburg to Istanbul via Almaty.  A21 neo for both ways with Recaro seats,comfortable for 5-6 hours flight. Food was perfect, especially from Istanbul. Good choice of beverages.  On the way to Istanbul I over slept my dinner, but I got it after and the coffee was hot. In Istanbul new airport I had to visit Air Astana kiosk and I got  qualified assistance there! Other flights Saint-Petersburg to Almaty, from Almaty to Astana and back to Saint-Petersburg were very good.	1
I had a fantastic week of holidays in Hurghada and to review a hotel is a must but I also think it is very important to acknowledge the airline which makes it all happen by bringing you over and back in safety. I flew with Air Cairo for the first time there and back after a week and both flights were comfortable and I felt very welcomed. The staff both on the flight on 24 June (Prague to Hurghada) as well as on 1 July (Hurghada to Prague) were friendly, smiley and professional. At one point there was strong turbulence and the staff were supportive. Next time I fly to Egypt I will go for Air Cairo.	1
Sharm El Sheikh to Amman. Perfectly smooth check-in process, our car seats for the kids were handled without fuss. One bag was 23kg but was not a problem. Contrary to some other reviews, our carry on bags were not weighed. We had a 10kg limit in any case. Staff on the flight were very pleasant. Although only an hour-long flight we were given beef shawarma - extremely tasty. Would use them again.	1
Dubai to Almaty. Overall impression is great. Flight attendants very attentive and nice - food is good. Entertainment, since I am traveling often, variety is limited for me. Renewed in two months, not enough. Some some standard business class seats, but I would prefer to Beijing a bed seat, it is night flight.	1
Almaty to Astana on an early morning flight in economy class. I was impressed by this aircraft which still feels very new inside. Inflight entertainment is available at each seat (with a USB port) and there is a good selection of programs. The flight attendants were nice and professional, good info from the pilots and we arrived to Astana with no delay. Overall a very nice experience.	1
Almaty to Astana. Consistency of ground service, food, cabin service and inflight entertainment are core values of this airline. Sometimes I push myself to have connecting flights to the destinations where they have no direct flights.	1
This journey was 6 legs long with Air Astana. Saint-Petersburg to Almaty, from Almaty to Ust'-Kamenogorsk and back, Almaty to Aktobe and back, and finally from Almaty to Saint-Petersburg. If my trip from LED to ALA is usual thing almost two times a year, but my new discovery was domestic flight KC863/864 from Almaty to Aktobe. Oh my god, even choice of hot meal dish. Other stuff just have to mention : clean cabin, perfect meal each way. I also had my air astana's mug I got last year. It's capacity is about 400 ml and asked to fill it up with coffee: "no problem, sure!“ I heard the answer! My flight from Ust'-Kamenogorsk was delayed, but I got notification by e-mail 4 hours before departure, so I was still at home. 6 flights and only one delay. I think it's good factor. overall: everywhere I saw attentive staff, helpful managers and perfect service.	1
Casablanca to Lisbon. I found this airline to be much better than expected. well cleaned aircraft, friendly flight attendants. On schedule too. Very comfortable seats. They sould increase their flights to Portugal.	1
Amsterdam to Atyrau. I am a regular user of Air Astana for work purposes and have been for over a year now. I had never heard of Air Astana before so I was very skeptical to say the least. What a mistake that was. I would put Air Astana right along big international carriers. The on board service and food are excellent the flights are on time. The cabin crew are very professional and language skills are excellent.	1
Best Airline in Europe, professional cabin crew, smiley and helpful. Receiving updates about my flight all the time. The thing that might really need an improvement is the FQT program (Miles + Bonus) , they must be more flexible in transferring and receiving points from other Airlines.	1
I travelled from Sharjah to Colombo on Air Arabia in June. The flight was full but I was comfortable. The flight was about four hours long. I checked in online but my phone failed so got replacement boarding pass at baggage drop. I enjoyed the flight and will fly them again.	1
I flew from Beirut to Sharjah on Air Arabia. Check in was easy as I did it on line. I showed my boarding pass on my phone to get through security. At the gate I changed my e boarding pass to a paper ticket as that was required. Although they loaded a lot of cargo we took off on time. I had three seats to my self and was able to sleep. I was given water and dates which were very nice. I will fly them again.	1
Frankfurt to Bangkok via Astana / Almaty. Air Astana was way more than I expected. Check in was super easy and the cabin service is great. The food, drinks and entertainment make long flights easier. They took amazing care of me when flights changed but I had an important appointment and they moved things around for me to get me back in time. They also put me up in a great hotel where I was also able to go explore Kazahkstan for a day! I will definitely be looking for flights with them again.	1
Great airline! I fly regularly with Aegean Airlines, and it is always my number one choice. Especially the new planes are really nice, and the service on board is good too. The food is really not that bad, especially in business class. However, Economy is great as well. There are some nice touches with Aegean, like how they inform you when your flight is delayed. They email you, and you get a notification in the app. About the app, it works really good. One of the best airline apps I have tried so far! I don't have any complaints. Even after dozens of flights, no problems at all!	1
Stansted to Ajaccio. Excellent all round. On time, drink and a snack served, no hassle to board or have onboard bags. Seats were comfy for a 2 hour flight - fare reasonable. Would recommend.	1
On September 4th 2015, we had reservations to fly Air Corsica from Calvi to Nice. Then we had connection on Alitalia to Rome. Our connections were very tight with only 45 minutes in Nice. Weather on September 4 created much confusion. The Air Corsica flight from Nice to Calvi was delayed 1 hour and arrived at 10:45am. We were going to miss our Nice to Rome connection. We expected to be staying the night in Nice. We departed Calvi 1/2 hr late. Fortunately, the flight from Nice to Rome was also delayed. The Air Corsica agents in Calvi arranged for an agent in Nice to assist in having my wife and I meet Alitalia agent. That agent escorted us through security to our gate and we made the Nice/Rome connection. We arrived in Rome only 1/2 hour late and all of our bags (4) arrived perfectly.	1
Stockholm to Tokyo via Moscow. Great experience with hard working crew and great punctuality. Many people say Aeroflot are a fraud and that it’s a bad airline but these people are totally wrong since they have changed totally from their past and now it probably is the world’s most underrated airline company. The crew was amazingly polite and kind but the one of the only issues was the cabin temperature was too hot on the way home (Tokyo-Moscow) but at least they listened and did what they could to make it better unlike many other companies who would have totally ignored it. The food wasn’t the best either especially when the plane originated from Moscow but from Japan it was way way better. I would definitely recommend Aeroflot and would love to fly again with Aeroflot in the future!!	1
Almaty to Kuala Lumpur. My family and I travel with Air Astana and are accustomed to a high level of service provided by the airline. During a flight last week from Almaty to Kuala Lumpur I witnessed a crew have to respond to an emergency medical situation about an hour into the flight. The professionalism of the Captain and Crew in handling the situation resulted in saving the life of a passenger. Medical emergencies can happen to anyone and at any time. Having experienced the crew's actions first hand I am confident that my family and I are in safe hands with Air Astana.	1
Moscow to Delhi via Almaty. Moscow to Almaty on a new Boeing 767, with personal entertainment screens and mood lighting. Staff accommodating and professional. The meal was delicious with metal cutlery. Wine and beer were complimentary (no spirits on the menu, though), and extras were served with no frowns. IFE was one of the best I experienced, no lag whatsoever. One weird thing was that the screen by design could not be adjusted when the seat in front was reclined, so the viewing angles could be uncomfortable. We were given outstanding amenity kits with neck air pillow, slippers, pen, some hand cream, eye shades and ear plugs. Different coloured kits seemed to have slightly different content, so make sure to collect them all. The crew passed the cabin with drinks several times after the meal service. Seat comfort was okay, nothing outstanding. Almaty to Delhi was on an older A321, with no personal screens. The seats were very comfortable with great seat pitch and traditional "thick" profile of the seats. Cabin crew were lovely and the meal was even better. There were some amenity kits given as well, except a bit smaller ones (which makes sense on a 3 hour daytime flight). You could access their entertainment via your own device and onboard wi-fi for free with no issues, and the selection was impressive, but the lack of power ports meant you will run out of power quite soon. Delhi to Almaty was practically the same as the flight from Almaty to Delhi. For Almaty - Moscow I have made a bet to upgrade on their website (the lowest amount possible), and we were upgraded to business. The flight on a Boeing 767 was wonderful with lie-flat seats, lots of privacy and space, great IFE and pleasant cabin. The cabin crew were very accommodating, greeting us with champagne as a pre-departure drink, and the purser greeted us by name, making sure we had a fantastic flight. Meals were delicious, each course was brought separately. If I could think of any improvement in business class, it would be alcohol menu, because there were just one type of champagne, one type of white and red wine (plus lots of spirits and cocktails). I believe the wine card can and should be improved. Their Bloody Mary was perfect, by the way. Almaty airport is an absolute disaster - it's small, crowded, with nowhere to sit or relax, no decent cafes, everyone is shouting at everyone. Even in business class lounge there is nothing to eat or drink for free, which is just a disgrace. Our luggage made it, and the flights were on time, though. To conclude, I recommend Air Astana, and the economy experience is outstanding, but I will try to fly via Astana next time, since Almaty airport is just so awful.	1
The best airline in Europe, professional cabin crew, comfortable seats and excellent service. It was a pleasure to fly with you. Keep up the good work and wishing you all the success.	1
St Petersburg to Ust-Kamenogorsk via Almaty / Astana. Clean new cabin, perfect meal each way, especially from Astana. I have to mention that food cooked in Kazakhstan always better than from other airports. Wide choice of beverages. Good schedule : short connection in Astana on the way back to LED. KC TV app very useful and its good thing for flights no longer than 5 or 6 hours and cabin not equipped with personal entertainment system. Service unbelievably attentive. Absolutely recommended.	1
Astana to Dubai. It was very nice family trip from start to finish. Everything about the flight was perfect, quick check-in, boarding, quality of special meal, reservation of seats and comfort, kids amenities, entertainment system, cleanness of cabin. I would only recommend to provide wifi access but cabin crew informed me that internet is available on some flights. Since I flew with my daughter of 4 years old I had things to do and hadn’t had a chance to enjoy internet anyway. Crew is very positive and i have been individually welcomed as a Silver member. Overall it was very memorable flight and I would recommend Air Astana!	1
Aegean exceeded my expectations. Didn't expected a snack and few drinks service on a few hours flight. I asked one extra beer when we started our descending and the crew handed out one with a smile. Way more better than other European airlines. I really hope they will earn five star airline status.	1
Smooth check- in procedure at a very busy Athens Airport. Polite and efficient staff on hand to assist. Boarded a clean and shiny A321 Neo, greeted by smiling and courteous crew. Full flight, on time departure, usual high standard of onboard service. Good and clear PA announcements from cockpit in perfect English. Toilets were very clean. Landed early, bags arrived on belt without any issue. Thanks Aegean, great flight and highly recommended.	1
Great daytime flight from Shanghai to Oslo via Moscow SVO. Despite some apprehension from other reviews regarding bags going missing at SVO transfer, everybody and their bags arrived earlier than scheduled at the final destination. Transfer from SVO Term D to E was a quick walk and uneventful. A well supplied lounge at Term E was quiet and relaxed during the short transit time. The cabin crew were friendly and helpful with perfect English language skills and the meals above average, with four main course options on offer and each was tops. Plenty of wine/spirits were available during meals and the flight generally. IFE was well stocked and adequate for a 10 hour flight. The lie-flat beds were not tested on this occasion.	1
Moscow to Bangkok economy class. Moscow Airport is good and the check-in was swift, via Skypriority  lane for Frequent Flyers. Recent Airbus A330. Flight Attendants welcoming and helpful. Was not offered a Space+ seat with extra legroom)although my GoldMember status entitles me to it - but I was offered a Space+ seat on the first segment from Paris to Moscow. Seat comfortable, with good width and legroom. Large choice of movies, watched 3 during the 9 hours flight. Dinner, then breakfast, both good in quality and quantity, and the Flight Attendants again perform very well. No more ice cream between meals, unfortunately. Arrived to Bangkok relaxed and right on time. Was offered a Priority Immigration Swift lane - very appreciated. Overall a very good experience and I strongly recommend Aeroflot.	1
I have had to recently use some other airlines and this has reinforced my appreciation of Air Astana’s cabin services. Air Astana has set and manages to maintain exceptional high standards of service. Al the cabin crew appear to have fundamental English skills. The new uniform is fresh and professional. The safety video has been improved and is actually pleasant to watch even after many flights in a short time frame. The new aircraft have screens on the backs of the seats and passengers can select their entertainment. The new earphones are great and I always keep the set. The passenger pack is in a useful bag and the products inside are good but I miss the mini-biro pen. The food and beverages are of good quality with a proper cutlery. I have found the cabin crew to be attentive and responsive to my needs. Depending on the airport I have boarded check-in staff may not have the same consistency but my recent check in at Atyrau was good (this is not usually a friendly airport though there are some exceptional individuals working there). I would say without fear of reproach that Air Astana is my preferred airline of choice.	1
Frankfurt to Berlin, our first flight was cancelled but they arranged me other flight. Next day I use Air Berlin also this time their service was on time and good service and cabin crew - they are very friendly and helpful. I was very happy their service.	1
Almaty to İstanbul in March 2018. There was no delay on flight. I remember smiling crew faces for that trip. There was delicious food and good entertainment for 6 hours flight. Note: wishing to see bigger planes for such a long vayage.	1
Antalya to Almaty. I write to commend staff on an exceptional level of service when I traveled with Air Astana on the 23 May. The service I had was a superb experience throughout the flight. I trust that you will pass on this recognition to the specific staff members from this flight.	1
Tashkent to Almaty. Excellent food, high tech inflight entertainment via their application and on time. Although flight was only for one hour thirty minute crew was attentive. The only thing I would feel to improve to make announcements shorter since all are in three languages.	1
I am frequent flyer with Air Astana. Almaty – Dubai is the best available option.  The check in procedure at the business class counter works smoothly without any problems. Business lounge at Almaty Airport is not good. Boarding is OK, still some airport problems, not enough jet bridges. The seats are comfortable for a five hour flight if it is not a night flight. The catering is perfect, flight attendants are very attentive, beautiful smiles. The entertainment program is OK, we are provided with iPad in business class with good choice of the video programming. Internet is missing on this type of the aircraft.	1
Unfortunately Air Berlin has gone broke, but they are still flying. I was a bit apprehensive because of the insolvency and the bad performance earlier this year, but despite the situation it was great: very punctual - even half an hour earlier on the inbound flight, nice crew and comfortable planes. Since Münster/Osnabrück is a small airport, one is at the gate within 5 mins of entering the building and boarding is very quick. On both flights we had an Air Berlin plane, a Niki flightnumber and a TUIfly crew. B737 showed its age but was fine. Paid 7 euros for a currywurst. A bit steep but it was excellent. Nice flight over Cologne and Lake Geneva with view of the Alps. I was out of Palma airport within 20 mins after touch down (only hand luggage) which was very good for such a big airport. Big surpise on the inbound flight: I was assigned an emergency seat for free. The normal cost is 25 euros, so this was very comfortable. We even got the famous AB chocolate heart at leaving the plane. It's a pity AB is about to disappear. I have flown quite a lot with them and it was always fine. The only reason I don't recommend them is the insolvency, because they're suspending flights already.	1
Almaty to Astana. The early morning flight allowed me to have the whole Sunday I could spend in Astana. We had a good breakfast in the aircraft. This year I enjoy my Silver Nomad. Despite of the downrating I was happy to know that Nomad Club members start to enjoy better scoring of points. Now we are 3 times quicker to collect the points necessary for the new tier or bonus ticket. Nomad Club develops well and I appreciate it. This weekend I will have my next flight to Almaty to enjoy running at Almaty Marathon that is also supported by Air Astana. As usual I expect good service from Air Astana that keeps me being a loyal client.	1
Almaty to Kiev. Very good experience on this flight. The crew was very attentive and helpful,  and plenty of legroom considering we were on a 6 hour flight on A320. Amenities were great and they offer everything you need to enjoy the flight.	1
My employer was stuck for 2 1/2 hours in the Toronto Pearson Airport because of a delayed Air Canada flight headed to Athens, Greece last evening (June 16th, 2022) due to understaffing of airport personnel and consequently would miss his Athens (Aegean Airlines) connection to Mykonos on the other end. I call Aegean's customer service in Athens and spoke with a lovely gentleman, Avgoustis. Avgoustis was calm, reassuring, patient and found me the best possible solution to get my employer on a connecting flight to his final destination (Mykonos) in the shortest time possible. He kept me calm! I really hope that someone will recognize this gentlemen's exemplary customer service.	1
This was the first trip I tried Air Berlin's (then) new business class service for Europe. I was really pleasantly surprised. This is in my view a much better product than LH or the likes offer. I like that you can get any food or snacks you want from their trolley at no extra charge. This is much better than getting a pre-set tray with food you have no idea what it is. Air Berlin also had very nice hot towels. Their staff really like what they do. The only minus is that they are expensive.	1
Moscow to Yekaterinburg. The flight time is 2h30min, I like Aeroflot's A320 seats, all types. The new one, are the best one, they have iPad and phone holders, power outlets etc. But this plane was 8 years old, but the cabin looks like it is new. On this 2:30 flight, you receive sandwich, candy bar, an apple and drinks (tea, coffee, different juices, and water) All is nice. Cabin was clean and crew were super-friendly!	1
Brussels to Moscow. Not my first flight with Aeroflot. And each time I'm surprised by 5-star onboard service: very polite and attentive flight attendants, always an extra attention for passengers with kids, on board beverages are foreseen for all class passengers, even on very short flight (from Bru to SVO: soft drinks and juice, fresh salad, scone, cheese, butter, bread, warm and very tasty meat or poultry dish, side dish, dessert, tea or coffee - all is tasty en fresh! This is just to compare the ticket of other EU companies who will not serve you anything unless higher class and so much more expensive ticket or on board extra purchases for snacks, and not a full meal). Fleet is super new, clean, again if compare with EU famous airlines. Looks like their high standards of service just grow and do not drop. Concerning the arrival and departure times, all is on time. Even if delayed at a/p of departure due to airtraffic of other (not by Aeroflot depending reason), the arrival time will be same! I can only advise this airline, perfect!	1
Excellent flight. This was quite different from the outbound KL-Almaty 10 days ago which was delayed 6 hours. The biz class is configured in 1-2-1, so every pax has his/her own aisle. The bed is flat at 180 degree (unlike the Air Astana 757). The service and food were excellent. While the TV screen was big, the choice of movies could have been improved. Air Astana, after the incidents with the outbound flight delay (Almaty - KL), you have redeemed yourself thanks to two of your very dedicated managers in the Kuala Lumpur operation. In addition, your b-class product in 767 is also way better than that of 757.	1
Excellent service from Air Astana team. A very pleasant flight of just under 4 hours flying from Moscow to Almaty. Service was exceptional and the crew very attentive. A very smooth flight and pilot was very careful with manoeuvres. Overall I was very impressed with this airline and felt very safe.	1
Tehran to Tashkent via Almaty. At the moment I am in transit at Almaty airport (not the best airport to spend the night) but Air Astana pleased me on the flight from Tehran to Almaty. It is the first time I have flown with this airline. Excellent, punctual, well turned out crew. Polite. Clean toilets. Amazing service.	1
Excellent service by the cabin crew and the ground crew. They went1 beyond their responsibilities and helped me do the check in for another flight to EU country and communicate with another airport. They are kind and truly helpful! I have been using their service for several years now and I never had a negative experience with them.	1
The flight was on time and arrived ahead of schedule. The cabin crew were courteous and efficient. One piece of my checked in luggage did not arrive and one of the flight attendants personally assisted me in filing a report. Despite all this I was able to board a bus departing 30 minutes after my scheduled arrival time. Thank you Aer Lingus	1
Moscow to Geneva. One of my favourite airlines. Good service, food and aircraft. Aeroflot has the world's newest aircraft fleet. The main Russian hub airports could be somewhat better I suppose, but that's not exactly the airline's fault. In any case, they're decent.	1
Whilst my journey from Bishkek to Alamaty was short, I found the flight to be a very pleasant event. The aircraft was quite modern and the seating was very comfortable. The safety advisory video was modern, novel and refreshing, rather than the traditional rushed human version. I found the Air Astana staff to be very pleasant and helpful. I would have no hesitation in recommending Air Astana for future flights.	1
Check-in procedure carried out professionally by extremely polite and communicative staff. Hand luggage was checked to ensure compliance with Aegean 's terms and conditions which it did. Breezed through Passport control despite the terminal being quite busy. Ample and polite staff kept queues short. Aegean Airlines terminal was spotlessly clean with ample duty free shopping available. Amazing authentic Greek food products like Greek baklava, feta and extra virgin olive oils were on promotion. Had to buy some. Boarding was orderly and we were greeted at aircraft door by immaculately dressed cabin crew. I am always impressed by how professional Aegean Airlines cabin crew are. They put Turkish Airlines crews to shame. On time departure with on board service of drinks and meal again served in a very professional and polite manner with a smile. Duty free trolley appeared after the meal service. Smooth flight, landed 20 minutes early. Excellent service from start to finish. Thoroughly recommended.	1
This is a great connection between Almaty and Pavlodar allowing a return trip within 24 hours. I left Almaty for Pavlodar at 6.30 pm on Thursday and was back next day at 5 pm. Although I flew both ways on a smaller Embraer-190 plane, the flight was not long at all taking around 1h 40m in one direction. Both flights were on time, no delays whatsoever. The flight attendants were very friendly and welcoming. It was great to see that it is possible to use the KCTV flight entertainment on this flight via a mobile device - excellent service which will hopefully become available on all Air Astana airplanes. Overall a very good experience and thanks to Air Astana for maintaining high standards of performance on regional flights like this one.	1
I was traveling to Stockholm, always with Aegean which for me is the top airline in Europe. It is not only service, the friendly and professional staff but also, one of the few airlines that offer meals included in the ticket price. And the meals are really great. In this flight a big surprise was the desert offered on the menu of the flight, Greeks call it "pasteli" which is a traditional sweet with honey and sesame seeds. The one of the flight, Navarino Icons Pasteli, was exceptional!!! It was so tasty, fresh and I was surprised that looking for the brand I discovered that it is a product of Costa Navarino which is a luxury sustainable destination and resorts and the opposite of an industrial product.	1
Phuket to Moscow. Our travel agency messed up and misinformed about our flight time so we missed our flight. The airport worker in Phuket Airport (Russian) helped us organize alternative flight quickly. Without his help we would have waited for 2 days for another flight. He really helped us. Best airport worker.	1
Rome to Moscow. Super, flew business class, was really surprised with the quality of service. From moment got into the plane the level of professional service was great. I have flown the same leg on economy two years ago the level of service was the same.	1
St Petersburg to Kamenogorsk via Astana, flights were in time. Cabin was clean, food was good, especially on the way from LED to TSE and service excellent. Inflight entertainment before I boarded, I got app KCTV to use aboard, this app for cabin WiFi. For me selection of movies should be wider, but when your trip just about 3-4 hours, it is enough. In some planes they still don't have WiFi or captain forgets to turn it on. New terminal in Astana is very good but for passengers flying to countries from former USSR, which now are Customs Union members they don't sell even water in duty free stores because of union's rules (they can't sell alcohol and all stuff with additional tax fee).	1
Hong Kong to Almaty with Air Astana was amazing. Business class has extremely comfortable beds with your choice of a regular blanket or a lovely plush duvet. Food is terrific with at least four choices for the main course, lovely appetizers and soup. The flight attendants and crews cannot do enough to make you at home. The magazine and media selection is wonderful. Traveling with my eight-year-old daughter was especially nice. Air Astana has an amazing National Geographic branded children's kit which was a huge hit!	1
Almaty to Bangkok. New plane, nice crew and very good service. I travel with family and also like treatment of my small children - they provide attention, and give gifts. The travel kit in economy class is also great. Excelllent qualty. The pilot kept great contact with passengers. I am really proud of our national carrier Air Astana.	1
Aegean Airlines are the best airline in Europe. They keep on doing an amazing job. Website and application are very easy to access, cabin crew are professional. New aircrafts and clean cabin. Best value for money.	1
Prague to Ho Chi Minh via Moscow. Having seen negative reviews, we (two adults, three kids 3-10 yo) decided to leave a review here too because we found the airline was excellent in many aspects. Check-in: no hick-up. It was opened two hours before flight, maybe due to Prague's policy, not airline. We wish the airport/airlines may consider this as we found the immigration at Prague was excruciatingly slow, almost deliberately by the staff who manned the counter. We were asked numerous questions and he perused through each passport very slowly without apparent reason. We made it to the flight a few minutes after boarding time had closed despite being number four to check-in. A few travellers were also late behind us.Thankfully Aeroflot waited for us! Our baggage were checked in all the way to Ho Chi Minh where we collected each of them safely. Food: We requested Muslim food. As the PRG-MOW was below 3 hours, special meal request could not be entertained (Aeroflot's policy). This is an aspect which the airline could improve. We came well-prepared with outside food and were not told off by the steward/ess. Orange juice was particularly nice. From MOW to SGN, we were provided with Muslim meal in a very well-presented boxes. It came with halal certification information booklet by a Russian halal authorisation agency. This is much better than the handwritten or sticker of MOML as in other airlines. Aeroflot scores highly from us for ensuring total confidence over the food that they serve. In flight magazine: They certainly have listened to complaints and we are happy to report that they have an in-flight magazine in English, in addition to the thick Russian one. Good job Aeroflot! We now have Nov and Dec 2018 issues as part of our collection! In flight entertainment: Aeroflot may have the largest selection of movies to watch in addition to excellent games for kids. They also have good selection of local (Soviet and Russian) hits. Every passenger was supplied with earphones. The quality of the screen and audio was excellent. 5. For kids, they received two different sets of bag/toy/stationeries/games for the two legs of travel. Very nice bag that my youngest keeps wearing everyday even after a week off the plane! Very nice touch from the Aeroflot! 6. Cabin crew were polite and gentle enough throughout the flight, at check in counter and when speaking with the kids. Amenities on board were also good including blanket, socks, soft slippers and eyemask on the MOW-SGN. Overall cabin experience was great. The flight was warm, clean and spacious enough with reclining seats, and lift-able armrest, allowing my kids to sleep on my laps. Overall Moscow Sheremetyevo experience was excellent. Immigration was polite and quick. Airport facilities were great. There is even a family room at Terminal D which could be booked for free to up to 24hrs by a family that has at least one <7 yo. It has beds for small kids and sofas for older ones, a playing room, nappy changing room, basic kitchen (for warming baby foods and hot water) and private toilet. It is manned by a personnel who just need to be shown the passports and boarding passes. We used 12 flights for this particular trip, and Aeroflot scored highest. It was a positive experience for all of us. We were not expecting this as the price was unbelievably low for PRG-SGN (below MYR1000 per person). We have no hesitant to use and to recommend Aeroflot in the future. Well done!	1
Malaga to Bangkok via Moscow Sheremetyevo airport, we booked with Aeroflot because they were the best price. The planes were new and clean, the food was very good, the attendants spoke a little English and were excellent and the on board entertainment was great. On our outbound leg we had just a 60 minute connection time to get from Terminal 4 to Terminal 2, the ground staff were helpful and guided us promptly to our next flight. Would definitely travel with Aeroflot again.	1
Trivandrum to Sharjah and return. Being a frequent flyer on this route in my opinion Air Arabia is one of the best low cost carriers I have flown. Every time the flights were on time clean and tidy with not so bad seats and leg space. Food available for purchase on board was reasonable and quite good. Overall a very good value for money and a highly dependable airline for sticking on to the schedule every time.	1
Bangalore-Sharjah. Despite leaving at ungodly hours 3.30am in my case this is probably one of my favourite low cost carriers and in my opinion better than some full service airlines that fly from the middle east to India. Plane was clean and service was excellent plane half empty so had whole row to sleep. Since leaving so early in the morning lights are switched off early overall happy with the service Air Arabia provides.	1
Moscow to Almaty, A321 is new aircraft with about 32 seats in business, not flat bed but for the 4 hours flight, the seat is enough. The food is good. Rich variety and tasty. Services of flight attendants are very nice, attentive and good. The entertainment system is provided through IPADs, it is good choice, but I would increase the number of the product -if you travel often, you watch everything. Generally, in my experience, it is always on time.	1
I was flying from London to Almaty via Istanbul with Turkish Airlines. I had planned to arrive in Almaty 3 days before the wedding. However, due to the heavy snow fall, the airport at Istanbul closed. I was stranded, without my luggage, and so worried that I would not arrive in time for my wedding as the earliest flight Turkish Airlines could offer was on the day of my wedding. My fiancé saw Air Astana were able to fly earlier and bought me a ticket. I was stranded, without my luggage, not knowing what was happening and when I would be arriving with my fiancé but Air Astana were wonderful and very professional. The cabin crew were a credit to Air Astana. I will certainly fly again with them and recommend.	1
Personnel au sol et navigant très agréable et attentif. Bonne ponctualité . Les sièges sont confortables en économie tout comme en sleeper eco . Très bonne qualité de services de manière générale . Les repas sont également de qualité. Le transit à Astana est très facile et les connexions sont bonnes. Très bon rapport qualité prix pour cette compagnie que je recommande vivement. Staff on the ground and navigator very pleasant and attentive. Good punctuality. The seats are comfortable in economy as in sleeper eco. Very good quality of services in general. Meals are also quality. The transit to Astana is very easy and the connections are good. Very good value for money for this company that I highly recommend.	1
Overall a great service from Berlin to Chicago with Air Berlin. Full recline seats. Purser took much care. The meals where in very good quality and served in a good way. Wine corresponded perfectly. The entertainment could be a little more extensive and the remote was a little cumbersome. But overall service was great!	1
Flying Aeroflot SU2103 from Riga to Moscow Sheremetyevo. Excellent service right from the boarding in Riga to the disembarking in Moscow. Pleasant staff, great food (despite this is a relatively short flight), enough legroom and individual entertainment. Flight was on time. Very pleasant.	1
Bangkok to Almaty return. First time flying with Air Astana and was incredibly impressed. The service from ticketing, check in to on board was exceptional. Travelling with a baby can often be tiring and stressful however they accommodated our needs every step of the way. On return we had a quick transfer in BKK to another airline. Air Astana staff were able check our luggage right through to the final destination & tagged it to ensure ground crew knew of the urgency. All went very smoothly and we made connections with zero fuss and our bags arrived first on carousel. I highly recommend Air Astana and look forward to flying them again.	1
Bangkok to Almaty. I travelled with the Air Astana for the first time and it exceeded my expectations. The airline staff was responsive and extremely attentive. No issue with any request.  The food variety and quality was outstanding (I am considered to be picky).  The seats were very comfortable whether you wish to sleep or watch a movie. It was the best flight experience I have had.	1
Bangkok to Almaty. Traveling on an airline for the first time, with a 1-year-old child is one of the more stressful things you can do, but Air Astana made it an absolute breeze. The service we received on the flight was excellent. The food menu was extensive and varied and the drinks menu was the same. The inflight entertainment was extensive and current and the seats were comfortable (I'm 100kg and 6'2"). Nothing was too hard for the staff, they were  the friendliest hosties I've ever encountered. We will be back.	1
Air Astana is improving. Even domestic flight was perfect: smiling crew, clean cabin. when they run out of one of drinks stewardess apologized a few times. The weakest thing in Air Astana is inflight entertainment: no personal screens. But they  put wi-fi and suggesting to download app before flight, so, before boarding just get the app!	1
Zurich to New York return via Berlin Tegel in Business Class. This was an amazing experience and everything went according to plan. The crews were friendly and professional. I am a Star Gold as well as a One World Emerald member and in my opinion Air Berlin and Etihad are ahead of the competition with their personalized service concept in business class (no lights on for two hours after take off and then again two hours before landing and a personalized inflight service concept, on demand with no disturbing factors. An outstanding product with just 19 seats in business class. I could also use the AA first class lounge at JFK which is new and amazing. I would strongly recommend Air Berlin.	1
We had a return flight from Moscow SVO to Guangzhou by Aeroflot, we had a business class tickets. It was very nice, pleasant crew, very nice food, some Russian and Chinese dishes like Borsch and Chinese set, also I ordered a big portion of ice cream.  Aeroflot use 2 varieties of A330-300, one I flew in October  2017 was an old one, the seas have less legroom than new one, but not bad, they made in orange colors only and the recline is 160, it not full flat, but in the same time, it is one of the most coziest one. On the new cabins such as I flew are full-flat beds, they made of orange cloth with blue leather parts, because of it, it looks less cozy but it still very comfortable.Aeroflot has one of the best IFE, unfortunately it is little bit slow. Very nice amenity kits also provided onboard. I think Aeroflot is one of the best airlines.	1
The flight was amazing and the crew was very kind and friendly. The cabin was clean and spacious. It was a short flight so only a bottle of water was offered. Embarking and disembarking was coordinated really well to avoid crowding and spread of COVID-19.	1
Last minute trip to Athens with Aegean. Check in procedure was a breeze. All Covid compliance checks ok. Boarding was quick, polite , mask wearing crew greeting passengers. Snack served on smooth flight. Landed early, good announcements from cockpit. Nice service from cabin crew. Cleared immigration quickly in Athens. Suitcases arrived on belt undamaged. Great trip. Thoroughly recommended.	1
Aegean check-in was busy but agents were polite, professional and not stressed. Passport control and Covid checks were handled well. Great selection of duty free at Athens Airport. Boarding was efficient and welcomed by mask wearing crew. Clean, new A320 NEO inside and outside. On time departure, clear announcements from the cockpit. Smooth flight, snack served. Crew carried out cabin checks for mask compliance with courtesy. Landed early. A superb flight from a wonderful crew and great airline. Well done Aegean in these difficult times. Thoroughly recommended.	1
New York JFK to Berlin. Great service and friendly crew. When I booked, I saw some people reporting bad reviews about them, I was sceptical. I must say I was beyond happy and grateful that I flew with them.	1
Prague to Moscow SVO. First time on Aeroflot, great experience. Aeroflot might be the last true business class for short/medium haul in Europe. I booked economy assuming the business class seats would be the standard coach with the middle seat left empty as with BA, AF, SAS etc. Nice to see someone flying with the 2+2 layout common for business class in North America. Enough space to actually get a laptop out and get some work done. Gate agents in Prague were friendly and quick, equipment (A321) was brand new. Flight crew spoke perfect English and friendlier than I'm used to on domestic flights at home.	1
It is the first time I took Air Astana to Istanbul. Time was quite convenient, working hours I spent in office and arrived late evening. Enough time for rest and to be fresh in the morning. The food is good, with the great variety and taste. Service is very good, the staff is very attentive. The entertainment system is the ipad provided by the airline which is good solution. But I might say the choice is a bit limited. If you fly a lot, you watch everything good and start to watch international movies that not bad too.	1
I am French and thought before that there is no better way to fly than Air France or Lufthansa. Since i am in Kazakhstan (2 years) Air Astana is for me now the number one before European airlines. The service and welcome is perfect, food is really good and most of the time, flights are on time! The fidelity programm is very flexible and very attractive.	1
Efficient and polite check-in, hassle free passport control and Covid compliance procedures. Attentive, welcoming cabin crew greeting all passengers upon boarding and all wearing masks. Informative announcements from cockpit pre departure. On time take off, box meal with water served and regular checks by cabin crew to ensure make compliance by passengers. Smooth flight with good selection of inflight entertainment and updates from cockpit. Landed early with understandable instructions from crew regarding arrivals and Covid procedures in hall. Bags appeared on belt within 20 minutes. Excellent flight, great crew. Very professional. Thoroughly recommended.	1
Almaty to Astana with Air Astana, the flight was a bit late, but the staff announced the reason for the delay and we managed to arrive in Astana nearly on scheduled time. The crew was super friendly and attentive. The pilot had a good sense of humour and made everyone smile while making announcements to the passengers. Thanks Air Astana.	1
Kiev to Delhi via Almaty with Air Astana. I am writing to share for comfortable plane, great variety of food, kind and polite employees on night flight 29th - 30th December 2015. My flight was also easy on timing with less than 1 hour waiting time in Almaty.  I appreciate for great service at least 50% cheaper tickets than European or Arabian airlines. (Bought tickets 12 days before departure date).	1
Totally disagree with the previous review. I must congratulate Aegean with all their Covid procedures. Check-in was quick, efficient and polite. Boarding conducted in an orderly manner with All cabin crew wearing masks and ensuring that passengers complied with the strict measures with announcements on the PA system. Box meal provided with bottled water and regular checks by cabin crew to ensure mask wearing by passengers. Smooth flight, regular updates from cockpit. Landed early, hassle free arrival with reminders about compliance with Covid rules upon entry to Greece. Well done Aegean, great airline to travel with. A 4 star Covid safe carrier.	1
I was disappointed many times by other airlines (wich I find ethical not to mention here) during these pandemic period. Surprisingly, I had very good experience with Aegean in every stage - from speaking to customer service to changing my ticket and getting alternative solutions to my problems. I what to thank the team with polite ladies on the phone and give you an excellent rating. Good luck!	1
Dusseldorf to Los Angeles in Business class. Outstanding experience today. Amazing cabin crew with attention to detail. Great food choices as well and very comfortable seats. Enjoyed the inflight entertainment system as well. Usually fly on Lufthansa or Swiss but Air Berlin is much better in business class in my opinion.	1
We have been surprised by new jets for summer destinations, equipped with modern entertainment, personal ipad with a variety of programs. Quality of meal and drinks onboard is good. Service on board is excellent. Crew were very professional. I can frankly say that these flights were very pleasant for our family and we would fly with Air Astana again.	1
Flight from Shymkent to Kuala Lumpur via Almaty and back in April. On vacation we were hospitalized with fever and skipped our flight home. Air Astana appreciated our position and changed dates for our unreturnable tickets without charge, so we could come home later. Great thanks for help, now we are your loyal clients.	1
26 April Tashkent-Almaty flight KS128 and 5th May Almaty-Tashkent flight KS127. Embraer 160 from Tashkent-Almaty-Tashkent. Excellent service on Board. It was at a high level starting from check-in to landing. Flight attendants were very neat and friendly also pleased with the print media. Even given candy during takeoff and landing as well as a pillow which were very nice.	1
Astana-Istanbul-Astana on March 16-18 2015. It was one of my best flight experiences starting from check-in inflight meal offering and friendly approach of flight attendants. It was worth every cent I paid.	1
I recently flew return from BKK to ALA. It was the first time I've flown Air Astana and I have to say that I was delighted with the attentive anticipatory levels of service I received. The plane itself looked brand new the business class cabin was spotless and a true delight to sit in. While the inflight entertainment was not as extensive as higher profile airlines this wasn't an issue for me. The dining experience was excellent quality varied food presented fantastically. The service and the environment along with the punctuality made this an excellent first experience of an airline that is clearly having an effect in the region.	1
ZRH to JFK via DUS in C. Excellent C service and product on both legs as always. Arrival in JFK 20 minutes ahead of schedule. After hundreds of short and longhaul flights in C and F with LH and LX I recently switched to Air Berlin for transatlantic flights after a satus macht from HON to AB Platinum. Really like the AB business product a lot more: 19 C seats only, proper lie flat seats and certainly not with cheap air cushions, no cheap trolleys coming down the aisle but proper restaurant style service with excellent foods and wines, very helpful, friendly and professional crews etc.. Last but not least, it usually only takes me about 10 minutes from the door of the plane to the taxi stand at JFK Terminal 8 wheras it can easily take 2 hours at the other terminals, specifically at the International Terminal 4. Finally, AB platinum status = Oneworld Emerald allows for First Class Lounge access across the entire Oneworld network with all Oneworld carriers as well as Etihad.	1
Moscow to Krasnodar. Great experience with Aeroflot. Very professional check in with a smile, New, clean aircraft, beautiful friendly crew. Very smooth boarding, great quality and very clear passenger announcements. I had a sandwich and apple juice for an in-flight meal, but it was only two hour flight, so it was enough for me. Overall, great airline.	1
12/2/15 KS942/952 London - Almaty. 21/2/15 KS601/941 Almaty - London. You really get the feeling with Air Astana that the company is genuinely striving for improvement all the time. Staff are extremely courteous and helpful planes are really clean flights generally arrive on time. The new economy sleeper is a winning option for people who dread the loss of a nights sleep but cannot bring themselves to fork out the full business class fare. I travelled with my four children and we all thought economy sleeper was brilliant. At least a chance of sleep much more space quieter cabin and better food that in economy.	1
Flight KC929 20 February. Was an overnight flight. Flight left on time and cabin crew were extremely thoughtful. Placed blanket over me while sleeping and when woke even though food service had finished and on way to landing - they found an apple to give me. Was a great experience and very impressed by cabin crew attitude.	1
I found this routing from HK-Almaty very convenient and have done it a couple of times now. Direct flight airport close to city and city close to ski fields. Great value for money. Well maintained aircraft good attention to service - what more do you need.	1
ALA-TSE. B757-200 not new AC but fully refurbished to perfection. Clean and inviting. Crew very well groomed wonderful IFE tasty hot snack on this 80 min flight. Temp however was very high in the cabin and my req to lower it a bit were not fulfilled. I started to feel ill and asked for ice to cool my head crew showed no empathy or care. I was glad it was a short flight.	1
IST-TSE-BKK (and back) on A321 and B767 first airplane saws its years the other one is great new and comfortable. The service from the staff was great. Very personalized friendly and they spoke fluent English. There was not IFE on A321 but 2 movies were on drop down screens. Excellent IFE on B767 with HD screens and good variety of movies TV series games. Food was very tasty and plenty of alcoholic drinks beverages coffee/tea. They offer newspapers and amenities kits. Great airline to fly with TSE airport small but new and clean.	1
I required assistance on flights from Edinburgh via Athens to Santorini, and on my return , I would like to thank all of your staff at every stage of my journey, they were excellent on every level and made my journey so easy and were pleasant and made me feel comfortable, thank you all so much	1
Sofia to Berlin Tegel. Being my airline, as their Platinum member I must say that we do have a really complicated relationship. I fly them a lot inside Europe and the service is really depending on who is in the crew. It can be a delightful experience or it could be a disaster, although I must say that in the last year you can feel some change inside the management and the service is improving and becoming good, therefore I trust them and give them 10 points for the change they are developing. Some might say that paying for the snacks and drinks it is a downside but I do think that for flights shorter then 2h you really don't need all these. The prices they offer are OK and the quality of the products has improved. You still get the chocolate heart when exiting the aircraft. The planes they got after the restructuring are in very good shape. Not mentioning that the flights are almost all the time landing on time or even before schedule. It is still very difficult to use their website in order to buy tickets and this needs improvement. The mobile apps are sometimes too long under maintenance and you cannot use all the features, but at least people are well informed about it. I really hope this airline will get back on track because in my opinion is the best German airline and it brings up the spirit of Berlin (those living in this city probably know what I mean).	1
New York to Moscow. I wanted to say thank you from the bottom of my heart to an Aeroflot representative who was sincerely helpful during booking of my flight to Moscow at JFK on April 7th 2018. She proved to be very knowledgeable, professional and determined in helping her customer (me), who needed a great deal of support, and direction in that difficult time. Hope all people who fly Aeroflot can experience this very memorable and touching side of humanity.	1
I took six flights over two weeks London-Astana Astana-Almaty and Almaty to Tashkent and all of them were very good and I was impressed with the staff quality of food and video/TV system. The flight between Astana and London both ways wasn't very busy and the planes were very modern and well maintained. It was a pleasure and relaxing to fly with them.	1
7 Feb from ALA To IST. I travel internationally and domestically frequently. Based on my experience Air Astana is a cut above the rest. As a person who is afraid of flying it is a pleasure to see the rapid modernization of the fleet. I am 193cm tall and leg room is important for me Air Astana usually offers the most. The inflight entertainment is current and changes frequently. Lastly I have found the cabin crew to be very supportive. there was one occasion where I complained about the temperature of the cabin being too hot and the senior flight attendant had a customer complaint book where she recorded my complaint. A great initiative which I have never experienced on other airlines.	1
Aegean is my favorite Greek Airline. In July 2019 I travelled from Munich to Athens. Aegean aircraft was perfect also seat was perfect. Landed on time at Athens Airport with smooth landing.	1
It was the best air trip. Aegean Airlines occured a flight from Brussels to Athens without any cancellation in addition to other airlines. (During the period of covid 19). The crew was gentle and ready to make us feel comfortable. The second trip that i did from Athens to Rhodes surprised me a lot, as it occurred with three only passengers. Me and two other passengers, it makes me extremely impression. I really appreciate Aegean customer service and policy and i hope to make another air trip with this airline soon.	1
Ala-Astana KC 683 back Astana Almaty KC 954 Almaty-Atyrau (Guriev) - KC 889B Atyrau (Guriev) - Almaty KC 890-B. Good service. Perfect take off and landings. Air Astana continues to work on their services and airfleet and I continue to see an ongoing positive development of the company. Some destinations are more expensive than others but generally good value for money.	1
I fly Air Astana very often almost every week nowadays. I find the experience with new 767 ER relaxing though the flights between Astana and Almaty are always full. The ground staff keep improving. Seems new planes brought a fresh spirit on board. 767 Business Class is great and gives privacy to the customers. Looking forward to flying the Dreamliner. Food is much better than before.	1
Los Angeles to Moscow. My mom was visiting me in the States and it was her time to go back home to Russia. I was worried about her travel because she does not speak English and long layover time. Today, when my mom arrived home, I called her and was shocked in a good way with her amazing experience of the entire flight. She was assisted by the LA airport's staff and taken on the wheelchair exactly to the Aeroflot gate. Upon arriving to Moscow, she was met by a Sheremetevo airport's staff again who took her to a waiting room on the wheelchair again. The layover time was more than six hours and I was afraid that my mom would be very tired and even fall asleep and miss her flight to the home town. How wonderful I felt by knowing that my mom spent the entire time at a clean and very comfortable waiting room where she could rest until her next flight. My mom said the staff was extremely professional, polite, nice, and showed that the passengers' comfort and safety were their number one priority. I want to thank Aeroflot for making those great changes and keeping our Russian airlines at the high level! Regards and deepest respect.	1
I travel very frequently on Air Astana from Delhi-Almaty. Check-in staff at Delhi and Almaty are very efficient. I had a wonderful experience on 18 April flying from Delhi to Almaty. The flight crew went out of their way to take care of passengers needs.	1
April 4 KC951 from Almaty to Astana. Return April 4 from Astana to Almaty KC854. Had the pleasure of flying Air Astanas new 767 service between Astana and Almaty. It was the best domestic economy class service I have flown. Each seat has in seat videos with the latest films tv music etc. I had a choice of international newspapers as well as a warm sandwich and drink. As usual the crew were smiling multi lingual and well dressed. The seats had a good tilt.	1
Flight KC912 April 2nd from Istanbul to Almaty. It was a fantastic flight crew helpful and smiling. All announcements very clear understandable and most important things for me multi-language Turkish English Russian and Kazakh. The way aircraft was new.	1
I have been using the services of Air Astana for years. Always a pleasure to travel starting from the convenient way of purchasing the ticket and excellent relation of crew members. I quite often take the domestic flights around two times a month and therefore comfort is crucial for me. In January I travelled to Frankfurt from Astana. As usual right from boarding until landing it was an enjoyable journey.	1
Thessaloniki to Berlin via Athens. This was one of my best flights with Aegean. Second time to enjoy the service from a great purser. Always smiling and very professional. Perfect!	1
My son and I flew from Chicago to Dublin, Ireland on June 23rd returned Dublin Chicago July 23rd. We flew to see a sick parent and their flights were reasonable. I wish Aer Lingus flew from Atlanta (we had to fly from Atlanta to Chicago) to Dublin - they are incredible! The flight going to Dublin was so comfortable and the food was lovely but the staff on both flights were also incredible. The staff couldn’t do enough to make the trip great! The captains and assistants flew us safely and checked in during the flight. Also want to mention Dublin Airport for friendly staff and especially Martina from Duty Free - she was incredibly helpful. Security was thorough and friendly also. Keep up the great work Aer Lingus!	1
Flying from Almaty to KL KC935 was very good we had an excellent inflight meal and the staff on the plane were helpful and friendly. The seats were comfortable and the leg room was good. I was able to check in online and then at the airport changed my seat to the emergency exit seats due to the extra leg room with no problems at all. Kuala Lumpur is fantastic and as we head towards George Town we are looking forward to exploring more of Malaysia and of course the return flight with Air Astana.	1
Flight KC907 March 21st and back on KC908 March 26th. I flew with my family from Almaty to Delhi and back and we were all very happy with the flights. The crew was nice and attentive departures were on time and we really enjoyed the time onboard.	1
I was lucky enough to be on one of Air Astana's new Boeing 767s returning from Bangkok to Almaty on the 12th January 2014. My business class seat was worth paying the extra over economy with the full lay flat seat and lots of room to spread out with a wide side table. Over the time I've been flying Air Astana I have seen them polishing their cabin service and the professionalism and presentation of the staff is of a high standard. Beverage service was very good although the food let the otherwise excellent travel experience down a little the meal was below par for business class. This was in contrast to the trip down to Bangkok and all previous international flights with Air Astana where the food has been very good.	1
My family of 2 adults and 2 children flew from Astana to Abu Dhabi (non-stop) and back via Almaty. Although it was a New year vacation period with heavy passenger load all services - starting with tickets sales to luggage delivery were efficient and precise. On our way back we flew a brand new Boeing-767 and it was the best plane I have taken so far. We had to stay in Almaty for a night because of the weather conditions and "Air Astana" provided us with great rooms in a downtown hotel and round trip transfer. Staff were polite professional and competitive.	1
I travelled with my family on the ALA-BKK flight on Dec 15 2013 and back on the BKK-ALA flight on Jan 4 2014 and both flights were on their brand new 767. The seat comfort was the best I have ever experienced in Economy and the leg room was significantly more spacious than in other economy cabins. Both flights were on time and despite very full flights the service was very efficient and pleasant.	1
Athens to Kiev. Among the top European airlines. Price is always reasonable and service is always perfect. I never had any problem and I always choose when available.	1
Lisbon to Athens. One more time with Aegean! Excellent as always, on time, crew friendly and approachable, hot meal and drinks for free, clean aircraft. Don't know if you need more from an airline if you fly in Europe	1
My husband took a turn and was poorly he couldn't get onto the aircraft by himself the cabin crew organised help who where absolutely amazing they also organised help when we arrived at East Midlands. The staff and cabin crew went far beyond the call of duty and exceeded our expectation. I cannot thank them enough. When I asked for help they wanted to ensure we were well looked after and we were 110%. The ground staff and cabin were the best I have ever experienced.	1
Moscow to Warsaw. A new plane and good service on board. I was amazed, when I called for a stewardess to ask for a water, and she came with water even having heard my request. She assumed in advance that I need a water when landing. Aeroflot is definitely one of the best carriers in Europe!	1
I travelled with Air Astana business class from Kuala Lumpur to Almaty on Sunday October 20th 2013. The whole experience was very enjoyable and comfortable. The cabin crew were very pleasant and helpful and the service was excellent. The food was particularly enjoyable and I was able to relax and enjoy the trip back to Almaty after a hectic week in KL.	1
I take Air Astana flights on regular basis local and international economy and business. There are a lot of modern new air planes that are being added continuously to Air Astana. The service is much more pleasant and more active inside the plane because the crew are very young comparing to KLM British Airways Lufthansa. The food is comparatively much better than other international airlines. In some planes they have some seats that are very unusual but comfortable you can sleep on them very easy and comfortable. On the international flight prices they are very reasonable. I'm definitely recommending use Air Astana.	1
When reading the bad reviews I almost decided not to book with them. But so glad I did. My experience was perfect.  Staff was friendly and took all the needed measures to hygiene & safety by wearing masks and cleaning toilets multiple times during the flight. Every meal had a little bag of alcogel and all middle seats were kept empty. I had a stop-over in Mexico-City, without having to pick up luggage. It all arrived perfectly in my final destination! The inflight entertainment and the food are somewhat limited, but still good enough. I have no complaints and would even rate this flight better than several other American Airlines I've flown with. Especially as the ticket had the price of a low-budget airline.	1
A big shout out to Margaret who was working on the Aer Lingus ticket desk on friday last 28th August. You dealt with my sister Debrah who was flying to Boston that day. We had a race against time to get extra paperwork. The code of conduct, customer service, empathy, understanding and compassion were second to none. I always knew Aer Lingus  were known to treat their customers with care and thats exactly what you did, you proved that right. Aer Lingus this lady is a splendid representative of your company and she should win employee of the year.	1
Flight LED-ALA. The new aircraft in rather good condition although seats are very used in economy class. Sensible costs good service on board friendly crew and tasty meal. The traveler mini-bag was given consisted of toothbrush toothpaste a bandage for sleeping and a pair of socks. On-board entertainment was rather good also pillows for more comfort were provided by default. These airlines will be my choice for future trips to KZ.	1
Round trip HKG-ALA-SVO. Meals tasted good. Staff Service excellent both inside and outside the flight. Staff in transfer lounge nice and helpful. Before my return trip from SVO-HKG I had a flight from Riga to SVO with Aeroflot. When I arrived at ALA for transfer the staff of Air Astana suspected and asked if I had any checked luggage. I said I had and Aeroflot had already transferred it to Air Astana as they told me so. He said my luggage was not with the flight according to their record. He also went out to see if my luggage was at claim lounge. He couldn't find mine so took me to report lost baggage. 15 mins after reporting the loss I was waiting for my next flight in departure lounge. My luggage was found at SVO airport. Staff in transfer lounge were professional and helpful.	1
Cairo to Prague via Athens, friendly staff (cabin crew, check in employees), great service, hot food served , clean aircraft. Not the first time with Aegean Airlines and they are always improving, keep up the great work. You deserve to be the best airline in Europe.	1
Aegean Airlines has a consistently good service that ranges from customer service on the phone center to very friendly and welcoming cabin crew. The flight left on time, the airplane was spotlessly clean and pilot provided information several times. Food during flight was delicious. The only negative thing I can mention is the crowded lounge (which otherwise has a great choice of food and beverages) in the mornings when several Aegean airplanes are departing at the same time. In general, flying Aegean is always a pleasant experience for me with a good value for money.	1
Athens to Sofia. Excellent value for the money I paid (93 Canadian dollars). Seats were comfortable, airplane was clean, great staff service. This is the 3d time I take them. I flew with Aegean 3 years ago and once again they deliver and are worthy of their 4 star rating. I was not expecting food to be offered on this flight make sure you make your meal request well in advance, otherwise there may not be anything vegetarian. (This was my fault). All I can say is that the food looked like it was good quality and they offer a reasonable selection of beverages.	1
Moscow to Tivat at the end of summer. Flight was well served and food were fine. Staff was helpful. I use the loyalty program of the airline and this makes my flight even more pleasant and cheap. Don't miss a chance to fly with Aeroflot.	1
Athens to Moscow. My flight was operated by Airbus A321 and was completely full. The seats were very comfortable, the warm breakfast was excellent served both in quantity. It seems that flight attendants have significantly improved their knowledge of English. The plane took off and landed on time. I definitely recommend flying Aeroflot.	1
ALA-KZO. return. Service was pleasant and efficient. Very polite and professional staff onboard. Food was good but could have been a little better.	1
Dushanbe - Almaty in business class. A Western standard experience including attentive and friendly cabin crew and excellent food. On time departure and arrival. This short trip was a relaxing moment in a busy day plus got some work done in the spacious seat. The seat armrest was broken though so hopefully a repair was due just after this flight.	1
Almaty to Hong Kong and back. It was smooth no delays. 757 of Air Astana’s fleet has good business class with quite comfortable seats - almost flat. Good food and service. Inflight entertainment is ok they provide Ipads which is quite convenient.	1
KC902- flight from London to Astana. No delay at all. The seat was quite comfortable staff service excellent I was served some traditional Kazakhstan food and it was delicious. There wasn't much inflight entertainment. This airline is the best way to access Kazakhstan.	1
ATH - LHR, 8 September 2019. Check in was a breeze at the very comfortable Athens International Airport. Polite and friendly Aegean staff on hand to assist with Self Check in counters. A smile and a sense of humour made the process easy and informative. No excess charges necessary for luggage. I really don't understand people who post reviews on here and bemoan the fact that they have to pay extra if their bags exceed the permitted baggage allowance. You will have to pay more regardless of airline so use your common sense and educate yourself about your permitted allowance. Boarding was undertaken in an orderly manner. Greeted at the aircraft door with a very warm welcome by immaculate looking cabin crew. Flawless hair and make up. Elegant and functional uniform. Departed with a 20 minute delay. Drink service commenced shortly after followed by a very tasty, hot and well presented vegetarian meal. One of the best I have experienced. Great service from the crew. Aegean is one of the few airlines in Europe that offers a full service on board and is to be congratulated. Landed 5 minutes ahead of schedule. Great flight, excellent crew. Shall definately be flying Aegean Airlines again. Good job.	1
Flew with Aegean from Athens to Catania. The flight with Aegean was once again exceptional. Modern aircraft, very friendly and helpful crew, entertainment system (Aegean Stream). The FAs managed very good work despite the full cabin. The food was nice (sandwiches), yet I would like to have a hot meal on shorter intl routes, as most flights with Aegean. The only thing I can complain about is the boarding procedure. During both boarding in ATH and disembarkation in CTA we used buses, despite the fact that there were available jetbridges in Catania airport. Overall a very good flight, with value for money (108 EUROS during high season).	1
Dublin to Chicago. Aer Lingus was very understanding and flexible during the coronavirus pandemic. We needed to change our flight once the UK and Ireland ban went into effect. They were helpful and quick with the change, at no extra fees. The flight attendants and crew were so pleasant and happy to help during our flight which helped ease our stress levels. I would recommend Aer Lingus and continue to fly with them in the future.	1
ALA-BKK on 13th February 2013 returning on 17th February 2013. Offered a business class upgrade on boarding. The flat bed seats were brilliant for an overnight flight as was the meal drinks selection and level of customer service. A relaxing journey which went quickly due to the level of comfort and service. On the return journey I was in the economy seat I had originally purchased. I slept almost all the way and with my seat fully reclined I was able to stretch my legs out fully. There was certainly more legroom available than on other airlines I have flown into and out of Almaty and Kazakhstan itself. The meal was a lovely Thai chicken curry. The service was great and the drinks trolley was always in service.	1
Sofia to Beirut via Athens. Once again an amazing experience with this airline. Flights on time, hot meal (on 1h 20’ flight), comfortable seats, clean cabin, friendly and professional crew. This is why Aegean has been my first choice in recent years. I hope they keep up the good service they are offering and do not downgrade. Frankly, I can’t say anything bad. Love Aegean.	1
We were booked on flight AB3165 on May 27th from Faro to Helsinki via Berlin. We had pre-booked seats with extra legroom and some food. Although the flight was some 40 minutes late taking off we managed to make the flight to Helsinki AY918 in time. I just like to say that we had a very pleasant flight the whole way thanks to very nice cabin attendants on both flights. We fly to Faro and back about four times per year and always try fly Air Berlin. So a big thank you for looking after your customers.	1
My husband and I had a return flight to Montreal on january 14. For personal reason we needed to cancel our flights . Air Canada employee Alberto Colagrosso took care of cancelling our travel arrangements. He was courteous and efficient. With these difficult times which we are going through, people tend to be very impatient however Mr. Colagrosso was very patient and understanding. Thank you Air Canada for hiring competent employee.	1
Travelling a lot between EU and Moscow. Excellent service. Almost always on schedule. When I have the choice I always choose Aeroflot when travelling to Russia. Seats were more comfortable when Aeroflot was using the Airbus A320 for Brussels / Moscow flights and more space for legs in economy. No extra for food and drinks on medium range flights compare to competitors like Brussels Airlines. Very convenient daily overnight flight from Brussels (in addition to a day time flight) to avoid the (massive!) peak hours Moscow traffic jam.	1
After a nightmare experience with United (who rebooked us with their Star Alliance partner Aegean) including several delays, and cancellations, we arrived in Athens to no luggage, which was United's responsibility, not Aegean's. We dealt with United for four days trying to get our luggage from Newark to Athens. Eventually they told us to Taxi back to the airport and promised our luggage was there, a very kind supervisor came out and talked to us to explain the luggage was not, in fact, there. (We did not even ask for a supervisor.) He was very understanding and patient and asked us to trust him. At this point our time in Athens was over and we left the airport to board our cruise ship, thinking there was no way we'd ever get our luggage in the middle of the ocean. The next night there it was in our cabin when we opened the door! We couldn't believe it. The supervisor had gotten our luggage from Newark to Athens, then onto Santorini Island, where our Princess Cruise ship then transported it from the island and onto the ship and then to our room - all within a day. In all we went five days without luggage, but once Aegean was involved we had it within about a day, in a much more difficult route than it would have been for United to simply put it on the plane to Athens. Everyone was so compassionate and kind. But it didn't end there. Upon arriving home, I began the impossible task of dealing with United to receive compensation - they had told us to keep all receipts for the five days without luggage and we had. We spent hours on hold, hours on the phone, getting nowhere. Finally, based on the File Reference number (that I'd given them over and over and over) someone finally clued in and explained the International agreement that wherever you end up is who is responsible for the luggage. Wait, so we get to deal with Aegean again? Wonderful! I called and a kind man explained exactly what to do and gave me an email. In less than a day I got a response telling me exactly what to do to make a very easy process go smoothly. I've spent three weeks with United and got nowhere, while being treated rudely. In the last few days everything has been submitted to Aegean in a easy process with a kind person on the other end helping. We wouldn't have realized how amazing Aegean is had we not had such a bad experience through their sister airline, that only Aegean resolved, for them. Aegean went above and beyond, with every person we dealt with, they will be the first we use if at all possible.	1
I had two wonderful flights on Aegean Airlines on June 18th and on June 27th between Dusseldorf and Athens. The cabin crew was excellent: They took care of each guest, they were on both segments present at all times with a natural smile and much kindness! I‘ve flown Aegean several times and they really deserve the top ranking. From check-in till baggage-delivery everything went totally smooth! An Airline with an outstanding standard of operation. Delicious meals with a Greek touch, Greek wines and spirits as well as Cappuccino and Espresso on demand! This is truly not common even in Business Class on flights within Europe these days.	1
Dublin to Chicago. Excellent customer service today from Leah on the Premium check-in desk. Her infectious good humour set us all up for a great start to our US holiday.	1
I flew with Air Berlin for the first time on Tuesday March 29th from Munich to Berlin. It was my first time flying with Air Berlin and I had nothing to complain about. Flight price was good. Cabin service was nice. They even served you beer and chips on a 45 minute flight and gave us chocolate as you exit the plane.	1
Paris CDG to Beijing with Air China. First time flying First Class ever and the experience was just perfect. It was an evening flight and I hadn't been eating all day so the minute I stepped onto the plane I asked if they had cup noodles on board. The flight attendant immediately offered to make me one before the plane took off. So I ended up eating the best convenient noodles I've had. Other than that the service was overall very attentive and prompt. Also I really enjoyed the wine, both red and white. One thing I'd like to note is that the movie selection was quite narrow and not updated frequently (basically the same from the May selection).	1
Winnipeg to Punta Cana via Toronto. Me and my family have flown many times on Air Canada and Air Canada rouge but this has to be the best time ever. When we left Winnipeg the flight attendant noticed that my mother has trouble walking so she talked to the ground staff in Winnipeg who then called Toronto and arranged a wheel chair for her when we landed to get us to our next flight. We could have made it on our own but the compassion and care that this flight staff gave to us really made our whole family’s day.	1
Moscow to New York JFK. Checking-in took a few minutes. Fast boarding, take off on time. Very efficient service throughout. Clean cabin and lavatories. Good choice of IFE. Decent food (Kosher ordered). Overall very good impression. Unbeatable value for price. I fly this route every 2-3 month, mostly with Aeroflot - never disappointed.	1
Almaty to London. The service was pleasant and efficient KCTV was handed out as soon as seat belt signs went out so the time waiting for drinks to be served passed quickly by. As for the new wine selection this is good now that imported wines are included. The change from my first flight (Nov 2007) to now is positive.	1
Athens to Larnaca return for work. Flights full both ways and punctual. Used the app to check in - very easy and convenient - still able to choose seats, some without charge - a charge applies to the front seats or the extra leg space ones. I was traveling with hand luggage only, however decided to check it in for free. Embarkation done on time and with order. People always trying to get in as much cabin bags as they can, however personnel handled the situation well, taking some on hold and I did not see them fining anybody. Light meal and refreshments served on this 1h30min flight. The return flight was very turbulent all the way, so they served the food, but stopped the drinks service early on. The majority of the passengers did not get anything to drink. Some passengers panicking and vomiting, but the crew managed It well, calming passengers and maintaining a good spirit.	1
Glasgow to Toronto via Dublin. Weekend in Toronto for a bit of work and a birthday party, husband and I would normally fly Transat Club or Icelandair Saga. Also frequent BA Buusiness customers. After flying with Aer Lingus, we will never fly with the other carriers again if we can avoid it. From business check-in, to streamlined security and clean, well-serviced lounges - even the pairing with KLM in Toronto was excellent. Polite, well-mannered cabin crew - who could not do more for you and were friendly without being overbearing or annoying. Excellent business class seats with a massage function that reminds me of Delta First before the refurb. Could not more thoroughly recommend the Aer Lingus premium product. The entertainment suite is also excellent	1
Toronto to Fort Lauderdale. Wonderful service provided on Flight 1626 on March 1st. Blair and Freedom really went out of their way to make sure the passengers had an enjoyable flight. After a delay of over an hour the passengers were getting a bit angry but these flight attendants really worked hard to keep their passengers happy and smiled all the way through it!	1
Bucharest OTP to Moscow SVO airport. I did my checkin at home and came with printed boarding pass. At OTP airport they were not able to scan the barcode and had to "board me by hand" in their system. It's Bucharest Airport problem because in Moscow I could board with the pass printed on the same printer. Almost 3 hours fly. I flew with a new Suchoi SuperJet with 3-2 economy class seat configuration (left to right). The seats were incredibly comfortable, covered with a pleasant fabric and plenty of leg room. There was no inflight entertainment, nor wifi or usb ports, but for a short 3 hours flight that was not critical. The cabin was quiet, no disturbing noise from engines. I can not comment on food quality since I ordered a special meal (which was very very tasty - especially grechka I missed a lot). There was a decent variety of soft drinks. No alcohol on board (not even for sale).	1
St Petersburgh to Madrid via Moscow. Everything was great. The food in short flight (LED-SVO, 1h 15min) is great - fois gras with marmalade, veal with tartuffo, cake with cream of coffee. There was no delay. The business class check-in was very fast, special passageway for passport control without waiting. The business lounge is normal. The long flight was a pleasure of champagne, good food and movies. The seats are large and comfortable - you can sleep without a doubt. At the end of the flight we were given a Chinese tea as a compliment company.	1
Samos to Heraklion via Athens. Aegean Airlines is probably the best airline in Greece, and its service meets higher end companies like Air France. The seats comfortable and space is enough. They rarely have delays and its overall a great experience. The prices for regional routes are quite high, but if you can book a month or two early, you can get a fair deal. Their miles and bonus system I think is below average and generally the promotions with banks to provide cheaper or free flights usually fails to meet expectations. All in all, I believe Aegean airlines is a very honest and professional Airline that meets most of the expectations you can have for a trip!	1
London to Belfast City. A smooth journey with Aer Lingus both ways. Check-in and boarding expertly handled and swift. Both flights on time (on the way back we arrived ahead of schedule). Cabin crew were friendly, professional and nothing was too much. I have been travelling to and from Northern Ireland for nearly 25 years now and have never had a problem with Aer Lingus. Long may it continue.	1
In July we travelled home from Portugal after a 10 day trip in Albufeira. As I live in southern Sweden, our closest airport is Malmö Airport but it does not serve as many airlines and destinations as Copenhagen Airport, which is also close to us. Unfortunately there were to direct route from FAO to CPH, therefore we hade to make a stopover in Berlin-Tegel Airport. We flew with Air Berlin. The cabin staff were friendly and were always ready to help if anyone needed it, they even gave us recommendations for which food in the menu they thought was the best. AB offered drinks and snacks for free, on both of the flights. It was very nice, either you could pick a chocolate kex or some crisps. The seats were as comfortable as any other airline, I was sitting by an exit on our FAO–TXL flight and therefore I had some extra legroom. After landing, they offered some chocolate at the exit. Would definetley recommend and fly with Air Berlin again.	1
Munich to New York JFK via Dusseldorf on Air Berlin business class. Ground service helpful and friendly. On JFK flights, welcome drinks served during boarding (champagne, juice, etc). On-time departure. Very good food on outbound flight (DUS-JFK), worse on inbound (the catering from JFK is awful). Cabin staff charming and friendly. Business Class is the same as  Etihad Airways, and all seats have direct aisle access. Thank you for this very pleasant journey.	1
Athens to Amsterdam. Business class was a good value. Used the app to check in, pretty easy, selected seat whilst making the booking (1A). Fast track security was very fast (although Athens airport is very fast all the times). Went to their lounge, which was very nice, with a good selection of food and drinks. Priority boarding was efficient, warm towel was given 2 times (after take off and after meal). The service was excellent and the food delicious - a traditional Greek meal cooked in a modern way (grilled sea bream and spinach with rice with a touch of lemon). It looked like a young male flight attendand was being trained and the more senior staff were very helpful and supportive to him. Very cheerful and smiling throughout the flight. Pleasant flight and care for the passenger.	1
Flying with my family from Lax to EWR and than London with United. London to Athens with Aegean Airlines. So happy that we arrived in London and finally we had a flight with Aegean back to Athens. The flights with United was terrible, rude people from the check in at LAX until the and in London. Dear Aegean, you are really small if I compare you with United but you have to give some lessons to them, to tell them about service and “philoxenia”! Living in Samos Island and many times I’m flying Aegean and never disappointed! Hopefully in the future you can fly over the Atlantic too. You have the best aircraft service.	1
London to Larnaca via Athens. Excellent crew and value for money. One of the few airlines to serve free food/snacks and drinks in flight. My flight from Heathrow was delayed and I had a connection in Athens. Surprisingly, they have connection ambasadors (as Aegean calls them) which are waiting for once you arrive to guide you on your next flight (if both flights are operated by Aegean or Olympic). The seats were comfortable enough as well. I am a star alliance member too. I have flown many times with Aegean and they never let me down. Very pleased.	1
I would like to express my gratitude for some outstanding customer service I experienced from ground crew from Las Vegas to Vancouver. I am an 80 plus-year-old lady that was not looking forward to all of the walking and stress of going through customs when we reached Vancouver. I was blown away with the attentive ground staff that whisked me through customs and made it so enjoyable and so stress-free, thank you so much for your assistance. Happy Thanksgiving to you all.	1
Moscow to New York JFK. Just recently used Aeroflot and they exceeded my expectations. Good professionalism and appearance of crew members, good cleanliness. Inflight entertainment (great selection of movies, cartoons, games with remote) and my favorite is the food. 10 hr flight with 2 meals (appetizer, main course with 2 options, dessert), ice in between meals. Soft drinks offer a good selection, complimentary wine. We are talking about economy class, not many airlines offer you all that (for no extra charge). They provided headphones, blanket, pillow, eyesleep mask. If your flight is 1 hour (like from St. Petersburg to Moscow) to my surprise, what they called snack was a tasty sandwich, yogurt and chocolate bar, coffee, tea, juices.	1
Vancouver to Mérida via Mexico city. This was our first time flying Aeroméxico and can’t speak highly enough about the staff and service provided. The plane was very comfortable and the staff went above and beyond to make our trip pleasurable. Dori at the check in desk in Mérida was outstanding. Thank you so very much for taking such great care of us!	1
Dublin to Athens. It was a rather nice flight. It is the first time I flew Aegean. We did get a snack and drink on board. I will fly them again as the service was great and outstanding.	1
New York to Dusseldorf in Business Class with Air Berlin. Very pleasant experience. Seats, overall comfort, IFE quality of food and FA's were all very good. In my opinion the Air Berlin business class product is outstanding.	1
The new business class is outstanding. Service is top notch, so are the food and drink. The seats are comfortable and have a massage function included. The way they are placed gives you loads of privacy. Way better than Lufthansa, KLM etc.	1
We booked a round trip flight for our grandson to fly from Chelyabinsk to Washington DC. He was with his grandmother on the flight to America, and he returned home as an unaccompanied minor. Aeroflot was super in their booking, taking care of all the details, and his flight home to Chelyabinsk was seamless. He had a six hour layover in Moscow which he passed under Aeroflot control, and was escorted to the Chelyabinsk flight with no problems. His checked luggage was sent along to Moscow and then to Chelyabinsk without him having to touch it until arriving at Balindino in Chelyabinsk. He is pretty mature for a nine year old but still this was his first flight alone. We were very impressed with the care Areoflot took to make his flight safe and enjoyable. Thank you Aeroflot for making this trip memorable for our grandson and for his grateful grandparents.	1
We traveled economy class from Athens to Marseilles France on July 11, 2018. We were very impressed with Aegean, from ticketing, to boarding, to the food and drinks. We are United million milers, and were very pleased to have been able to check in in the Business Class line and for our luggage to be given priority. The flight attendants were super awesome, and not at all surly like American flight attendants. Very pleasant, nice cabin crew. They were very sweet to our kids as well. The food was delicious. But please Aegean, can’t you provide some entertainment? At least allow for free wi-fi for entertainment or even wi-fi for purchase.	1
I Would like to give the flight between Athens - Copenhagen on July 16 2018, 100 stars if I could. This is about My son who was on the flight yesterday. He is so scared of flying and suffers from claustrophobia and panic attacks. He was sending Me text messages when they were boarding telling Me That he is getting a panic attack and wants to get off the plane. I told him to talk to the flight attendents so That they can calm him down. And they did!  After he got off the plane on Copenhagen, he called Me. Telling Me about the fantastic service from all your flight attendants.They checked on him the whole flight. Gave him water, food etc. Made sure he was ok. Please let the flight attendants get this message. You were fantastic. Thank you so Much. My son Will only fly with Aegean airlines from now on. Best service ever!	1
I flew non-stop TXL-JFK on 13 March and I was extremely surprised about Air Berlin's new Business Class service. Let's not mention TXL airport though. The rotten airport (including the Air France Business Lounge gates and boarding area) is a disgrace which I will not blame Air Berlin for. However once I boarded the plane the service was so amazing - like in good old times. I got greeted by my name. Blankets slippers amenity kits are individually brought to you with a smile. The new flat seat feels more like a private cabin than a seat - much better than Lufthansa's new Business Class or AA's new one that I used recently too. The food and bar service was like in a restaurant - including a special dish of the day that was not on the menu. Last not least: The flight attendants were tremendously kind and attentive.	1
Cancun to Montreal. I had the most amazing flight with Air Canada Rouge yesterday, July 31st. It was smooth and very quick to arrive. One flight attendant in particular made my trip even more special. Giulia saw that I was crying (they were tears of gratitude) and while I was in the bathroom, left me a chocolate bar at my seat with a note saying “No matter what it is, life is good. Keep on smiling”. I have never received so much sympathy from a professional in this industry before. Definitely a touching detail I will never forget that brightened up my already great experience! Thank you Air Canada and Giulia!	1
Zurich to Heraklion return. Hats off to Aegean Airlines! My wife and I have been flying to Crete each summer for the last eight years. In the past we have flown with a Swiss charter air line. Which was a pain in the butt, for we had to travel when they did, not when we wanted! This time we went with Aegean Check in at Zurich was just outstanding, AAS did their best to move things along even with a long line, done in less than 20 minutes. This was a late night flight, It left on time, and the in flight service was one of the best that I have experienced in a long time. The only interesting comment I can make about the flight down, was the landing, let's just say it was a copilot landing. The best part of the trip was the return flight. Those of us who have traveled to Heraklion, know that the airport is a pit of pain and agony. I will address this issue, in a separate review,for things have changed. With Aegean they have there own separate check in counter, and a self check in, away from the madding charter craziness. Checkin was completed in 10 minutes! This was just fantastic! Where in the past it took hours! Ther was only a slight delay in takeoff due to weather/air traffic in Zurich, in flight service was outstanding again. After 14 years of long haul air travel for work, I have to give Aegean four stars in respect of outstanding service!	1
Mykonos to Athens. Check in smooth and easy - decided to print my boarding pass, as my mobile phone battery was dying. No paper on the e-check in machines, so had to use the desk, but this was quick and easy. Security in Mykonos airport was a breeze. Not enough seating on the gate. Aircraft arrived on time and was prepared for departure at a record time. Boarding was easy, both from the front and back - we just had to walk to it. Also quick and smooth. Full flight. They had asked some people to give their hand luggage for storage, so there was enough space on the cabin. Initially we were told that due to heavy traffic in Athens we'd have to wait 35', however better assignment was requested by the captain and we left just with 10' delay. Crew very professional. We were offered a greek local snack in this very short flight 25'). Landing on time. It was a pleasant flight.	1
DUS-TXL-DUS. Attitude of AB ground-staff in DUS remains problematic. They are grumpy and arrogant. Crew on board okay. Very punctual and swift performance. Price (396 euro RTN for 4) included snack drink chocolate and 23 kg luggage. The only problem with AB is reliability. They cancelled the last two flights out of Berlin so we had to leave almost three hours earlier. Had a similar experience last year. On the other hand: definitely preferred AB above Germanwings because of constant strike risk.	1
After reading quite a number of negative reviews I can not believe I actually flew Air Berlin. My flight from Zurich-Dusseldorf-Miami return in Business class was one of the most pleasurable flying experiences I have had. The planes were clean. The crews were efficient and kind. The food was plentiful and incredibly good. The seats are extremely comfortable. The entertainment is the best in the air. Overall Air Berlin is much better than KLM Air France British etc.	1
Flew in from Venice to Toronto on flight AC1907 on July 18th. Although we were in Economy, the staff/crew treated us exceptionally well. Courteous, pleasant and prompt service. Circulated and saw to our needs. Pleasant disposition and truly made us feel valued. Made the 9 hour flight a very positive experience. Thank you, crew of flight AC1907.	1
Poor expectations (prior reviews) were immediately erased from checking in to boarding the immense business cabin! We were greeted by a most professional crew and amazingly gregarious Austrian pilot! Since our arrival would be too early for VIE we were entertained by the pilot for 1 hour who introduced himself to all business class passengers. The cabin was spotless with the largest space that I have ever encountered! After the tight business seats for 18 hours last week (A350-900 flight on Singapore from EWR to SIN) this A330’s was delightful. My French wine was spot on and all meals were delicious. I look forward to booking Air China on my next Asia trips!	1
Flew Shanghai to Sydney. Wonderful customer service. Air China crew are outstanding, what a lovely experience. My favourite flight, next to Qantas. Highly recommended! Thank you for making our flight comfortable and relaxed - you’re delightfully charming.	1
Manchester to Toronto. Cannot say anything negative about this flight. Travelled with trepidation after reading the reviews. The flight crew were 100 per cent attentive, kept us well hydrated. Aircraft was clean and comfortable. Seats were comfortable, food was good. Would not hesitate to fly with them again	1
Had a very pleasant and punctual 9-hour Aeroflot flight from Vladivostok to Moscow. Nothing to complain about: plane was very new, personnel was friendly, and the two hot meals (ordered vegetarian) were surprisingly good. Entertainment system modern and working, movies were also available in English (although this was a domestic flight). Of course there could be more space between seats in Economy, but that's how it is today with almost every airline on the globe. Ticket price for this 4000-mile-journey was almost ridiculously low (not even 200 EUR).	1
We had a a great experience flying with Aeromexico from London to Mexico City and back. Both flights were on time or arrived earlier and  the staff were extremely friendly and professional! The food was also on overall good level  we had some chicken curry, chicken with spinach and corn on and Mexican style breakfast on both flights). The tequila open bar was also great and we had some good tequila on both flights. Check in process and boarding process is also efficient and fast (except for the check in for one of our flights not working on their website so we contacted customer care and it was solved). We found everything to be of good standard and most importantly no delays or cancellation. In contrast, our flights with another airline (approximately 3 hours) got delayed by an hour each.	1
Hamburg to Athens. Aegean Airline is one of the best airlines in Europe. The staff is very friendly and helps, if you have any questions or problems. The airplane was clean and in a very good condition. The food in the Business Class was very tasty. The variety of drinks is also very good. Everyone, who fly to Greece, must try Aegean Airlines!	1
I was one of the thousands stranded by WOW airlines abroad. A lot of articles suggested Icelandair had you open a case, send all your personal information to prove you had paid already & told you to call to get a discounted rate as a rescue fair (the fair provided to me would have caused me to miss my flight within the states back home and been more than I could purchased for a normal flight on the open market through other carriers). I called Aer Lingus and asked if they were giving discounted rates, they where sympathetic, got me on a flight and gave me a discount with out jumping through hoops. They really were there for the stranded passengers abroad.  I had a very comfortable flight from Dublin to Newark. I highly recommend this carrier!	1
Montreal to Pointe a Pitre. Great flight. Had a disruptive passenger who created a scene over his carry on bag. The stewards were 100% professional in dealing with him and too be honest they were too nice. The return was just as good. A big thank you to air steward Codey	1
Moscow to Kaliningrad with Aeroflot. Excellent value for money and quality. Fast check-in, very courteous staff, no queues. Cabin crew at the highest level for a short trip, with very tasty inflight catering. Clean interior, a sufficiently large distance between the rows. New modern aircraft and one the most important is that the departure and arrival were in time.	1
Flying with Aeroflot was wonderful. Ironically, my flight from Delhi to New York via Moscow did not start out well, as it was cancelled because of a snow storm in New York. This was not the fault of the airline. The Aeroflot ground crew in Delhi was on top of things. They put me up in a very nice hotel with meals, plus transportation to and from the hotel.  The following day the flight left on time to Moscow. It was comfortable and the connecting flight from Moscow to New York was exceptional. The service was excellent, and the food was really tasty. Top marks for Aeroflot. They made what could have been a difficult time (because of the weather) very comfortable.	1
Aguascalientes to Mexico City. I got a free upgrade to Clase Premier along with my travel companion. It was a nice short flight, the flight attendants were attentive and called us by our names. On time departure and arrival, Sky Priority and a snack with beer.	1
Mexico City to Aguascalientes. The flight attendant’s service was very positive and service oriented. Captain explained to us the route, as well as he would make interesting remarks while flying somewhere particularly interesting. Free snacks and beverages were served. Seats were comfortable, good space 2x2 seat configuration. No TV screens as this is a regional aircraft, but it was a very short flight.  Arrived 15 minutes before schedule and fast arriving bag.	1
Rome to Thessaloniki via Athens. A very good experience! The handling was nice. We had only a delay because of bad weather condition in Rome. The cabin crew was very polite and helpful. The food was nice, any snack and drink was made by top brands. I would definitely recommend to fly with Aegean Airlines.	1
Düsseldorf to Dublin. Boarding started on time and the plane started on time. The whole staff was friendly offered help and was in a good mood. The tea was good. Seats are modern and the legroom is above average. The whole flight was enjoyable.	1
Manchester to Los Angeles via Dublin with Aer Lingus. I took ill on the return flight from LA to Dublin. The air stewards had been most attentive and friendly all flight but when I became ill, they were absolutely fantastic. I cant praise them enough. Also the paramedics at Dublin airport.	1
JFK-DUS DUS-ZRH TXL-MUC MUC-DUS DUS-JFK. From reading all these reviews before my trip I was a bit nervous but actually my trip turned out awesome! I took five Air Berlin flights on my 3 week vacation and not one of them was an issue. Even my bag arrived with me! All flights were on time served pretty decent food and the flight attendants were friendly. We got served chicken or pasta on the long haul flight and croissants or chips on the short haul. The legroom especially on the A330-200 was tight even for a 5' 3" person like me but it was a manageable. If you're tall you might have a problem. Each seat on the A330 is equipped with a personal inflight entertainment with a good selection of games and movies. When you select a seat on the A330 choose an even number because you'll have a full window instead of sitting between two halves of one. My only problem was the boarding process. Too many people were pushing and shoving when their group is called and the airline changed a gate in MUC without notifying us. Overall my experience was good much better than an US airline. I would definitely fly Air Berlin again!	1
Los Angeles to Bombay via Beijing. Other airlines charged $1200 on for a return ticket but Air China which sold its ticket for $850. LAX to PEK was a 13 hours flight, I was able to check-in online. The flight departed 30 minutes late but reached PEK on time and was able to catch my next flight easily. (layover at PEK was just 1.5 hours) After takeoff, the drinks and food service started. I had ordered a special meal (Hindu Veg). The food tasted good and surpassed my expectation. The in-flight entertainment had a good collection of Hollywood movies. I found flight attendants super friendly and genuinely caring. T Personally, I feel language is just a medium of communication, and I was able to communicate easily with them. I received all my bags in BOM safe and without damage.  Overall I am really pleased with my experience in economy class.	1
Los Angeles to Ho Chi Minh City via Beijing. There was a line for Star Alliance Gold member and First and Business class My seat 41D space is big enough. Out of gate on time 11:30am Entertainment adequate with 76 Hollywood movies, including 21 new released.  Transfer information is available just 40 minutes before landing. This is a very helpful feature that CA providing to passengers. The 10 inches passenger monitor function well. Food service was fantastic and it was served after 1.5 hours on the air. First meal: beef with rice or pork with rice. Beverages: adequate with many kinds of juice. The beer was served on Air China is Yan Jing Beer 燕京啤酒。 After first meal there was Haagen Das ice cream, my favorite brand. I took a photo, the female attendant said “do not take photo” but I was taking it any way. I just want to show the world their good service. Staff are so helpful. They help passengers with the hand carry on which I don’t see much on United flights. (I am United Gold member). Onboard temperature: good control.	1
Boston to Mexico City. Crew attentive and professional. Good food and drinks. Loyalty to Club Premier paid off and we got an upgrade to Business Class. Good in-flight entertainment and WiFi. Very new and well maintained plane. Good seats. The baby crib service was amazing as our baby was able to fully rest before our arrival. The flight arrived early to Mexico City. Baggage came out quite fast. In general it was an excellent flight. Aeromexico ground personnel in Boston friendly and patient with us and kids during baggage drop/check-in process.	1
Mexico City to Boston. A very nice and quite new airplane with Boeing Sky interior, different lighting schemes that help you relax. The food was good, (free full meal including beer and spirits). AM Plus (Premium economy) was quite nice and spacious. The overhead bins had a different configuration that made the cabin more spacious too. The flight crew were quite attentive and came offering different services during the flight (meals, duty free sale, drinks and water). Used WiFi for almost three hours and allowed me to work and stay in touch with the ground. We were traveling with a baby and AeroMexico offers a baby bassinet service.	1
London Heathrow to Bangkok via Moscow return with Aeroflot, and I have nothing but positive comments. Four flights in all, staff friendly, comfortable seats, food was quite good, good luggage allowance, no hidden extras, free drinks, lots of entertainment on long haul. Plane on return long haul journey was only 1/3 full, and told we could use spare seats to sleep. 3 out of four flights landed early, delayed on one due to passenger being told they could not fly so they had to get luggage off!	1
My colleague and I decided to fly on Aeroflot in spite of protests from our friends, saying we should fly on an American airline, but we are the type who like to take opportunities to try anything! My colleague is 68 and I'm 75 and we both are profoundly Deaf, using American Sign language (ASL). We are so glad that we flew on Aeroflot for everything had been just great. A great flight, good food, enlightening entertainment (in form of foreign films with subtitles) and above all, the flight crew was just awesome for they had made communication very easily accessible and that they had given us their attention when it was appropriate. They treated us as deaf people with dignity which in turn making us very human! Not only that, but we were properly treated to the custom area with class and ease upon our landing in Moscow. The very same things had taken happen on flights to Munich and back to Moscow and then on way home to Los Angeles. Actually flying on Aeroflot was on my bucket list and I made it and it was worth every mile! In the future, I'll definitely fly on Aeroflot whenever it takes me to!  Thank you for giving us the opportunity to fly with you. I'll vote it as the best international airline!	1
Guadalajara to Mexico City. High-quality service by professional and attentive staff. Free snacks and drinks (including alcoholic beverages) were served. Personal in-flight entertainment screen in all seats and USB port. Good in-flight magazine and  WiFi on board. Flight connection and luggage delivery information given immediately after landing in Mexico City and while taxing to gate.	1
Mexico City to Guadalajara. Used web check-in services, got my mobile boarding pass. Used the Sky Priority line in Mexico City’s T2 security checkpoint. Sky Priority and zone boarding was done perfectly. Bin space was good, the crew extremely friendly and professional service-oriented. On time departure and early arrival. In-flight entertainment with individual tv screens and also good wi-fi (I started my writing my review with Aeromexico’s GoGo in-flight WiFi!). I am a frequent flyer and enjoy using AeroMexico very much, I find it of high standards and very reliable.	1
Houston to Mexico City. This was the second leg of my trip from Houston to Mexico City. An hour prior to boarding the gate agent called me to inform me my connecting luggage was ready to be put on the plane and I could pick it up once I arrived in Mexico City. This flight was operated by AeroMexico Connect on an Embraer 190. Once we started boarding it was done from zone one through three. Newspapers and candy were available on the jet bridge in both English and Spanish and flight attendants smiled and welcomed us onboard. About an hour into this short two hour flight snack boxes containing a mini croissant, two slices of cheese, apple sauce and a chocolate were handed out in economy class. Alcohol was available I ordered tequila and orange juice. Afterwards I was given a beer and we landed in Mexico City on time. Service was great what makes it better flying a Mexican carrier is having a latin crew as well as not having to pay for alcohol or food. Would recommend this airline.	1
Athens to Dusseldorf. I travel frequently with Aegean and this flight was really nice. The cabin crew was really friendly and helpful. The whole flight from Athens to Dusseldorf was really flawless. The landing was perfect. We didn't even understand that we had landed (there was not even a short tremble when the wheels touched the ρθνςαυ). I definitely recommend Aegean Airlines.	1
Larnaca to London via Athens. They have wonderful cabin staff and are helpful, there with a smile. The food on board is very good as is the service, even though my flight stops over in Athens rather than direct, its still enjoyable. Only problem I had was first time at ATthens, when you are in transit its not clear where to go when you enter the airport . Apart from that can't fault anything keep up the good work.	1
Dublin to Gatwick was quick and efficient. I arrived at Dublin airport and put my bag on the scales / bag-drop. I needed to check-in my baggage. This was a simple self-service process. I then made my way to the bar and waited to board. The flight was busy the seat 1F was fine. A little tight but good for economy class. The staff were good and I had a nice guinness pie for the short flight. We arrived in London on time. The baggage didn't take too long to collect and I made my way to the train which was quick and only two stops into Clapham Junction. Overall a quick and easy way to London and less busy than Heathrow.	1
Flew Dusseldorf to Faro Portugal. Check-in in Dusseldorf was really nice got seats in row 9 with window. Check-in staff nice and polite and helpful. Plane boarding was quick and not a hassle and on time. Take off just 10 minutes late due to emergency landing of a 4U plane. Service on board was great very nice crew. Service with the Sansibar-Snack was nice we got a Currywurst with roll and two nice bottle of Pommery champagne for a little extra but it was nice to have that. Free movie shown on overhead screens and a lot of legroom. Cockpit crew provided us with nice information. We got jetbridge at Faro so deplaning was nice and smooth again. Baggage was on time on the belt. So this is a great airline.	1
London to Athens. Excellent experience, boarding was efficient and organized, clean aircraft with welcoming friendly crew. After take off, drinks served, cleared, hot meal served in economy (simple but good, hot pasta, eggplant salad, warm bread with cheese and butter, cookie) coffee and tea trolley passed twice. Flight landed 45 minutes early, priority bags came off first 15 minutes after landing. Impressive experience.	1
Dublin to Boston. I had a very stressful experience as when I got up to the counter to check in the lady informed me that my esta had been deleted by the American embassy. I was already running late so the lady told me to go to the side and get a new esta. I was so panicked as I really didn’t have the money to book a later flight and then the supervisor came over I can’t remember her name and I explained my situation and she could see how upset and worried I was so she called a girl over to help me. The lady who came over to help me had the patience of a saint she practically did the whole esta for me she couldn’t be more helpful! We finally got my esta done and the supervisor brought me through fast track so I made my flight. I can’t thank the Aer Lingus staff enough on how helpful they were with me really really nice people.	1
Flew from Muenster Osnabrueck to Corfu 2nd August and returned 6th September 2014. As we had our dog and dog box we found the service by Air Berlin staff at both airports very helpful and my family are grateful for this service. We travel every year to Corfu for a long summer holiday and certainly shall use Air Berlin again.	1
8th Aug 2014 London Stansted to Dusseldorf AB5825 and then 9th Aug Dusseldorf to Cancun AB7416 and return 23rd Aug Cancun to Dusseldorf AB7417 and Dusseldorf to London Stansted AB5826. Really good long haul cross Atlantic flights kind and helpful at staff check-in and for in-flight service. Good meals with drinks brought round in between. Planes seemed new with fresh seating and USB ports on the media screens. The short haul Stansted to Dusseldorf parts were delivered by Etihad Regional and again good in-flight service. The only slight negative was the time to check in on return they opened it 1.5 hours pre flight and completed 45 mins before the flight with only about 30 people in line the slowest check per person I've ever known. However Dusseldorf airport was lovely and smart for the wait time between flights. Avoided US Immigration hassles/poor customer service by flying Germany to Mexico.	1
Los Angeles to Barcelona via Moscow with Aeroflot. We are a family of six, our youngest is 10, I was worried about so many things, including the fact that you can't choose your seat until 24 hours before the flight. We had the best flights ever! We loved Aeroflot, the seats, food and entertainment, everything was excellent. We have flown Delta in the past to Germany, and Aeroflot was so much better. Movies were new, good shows, many options. Russian people aren't very smiley, good thing I didn't need a friend on flight, just someone to bring food and drinks! The only minor gripe, they served the drinks warm, no ice, and only a little water, definitely buy a water before you board the plane.	1
Flew to Beirut from Sofia via Athens. All I can say that I was impressed by what this airline offers. Amazing and professional cabin staff, both flights were pleasant and everything was on point. The food they served was also much better than others can serve during flight. I won’t hesitate flying with Aegean again. I love this airline!	1
Athens to Vienna. Punctual take-off and landing, nice and friendly cabin Crew, even the meal was fine. Very low price ticket, still high quality Service, I do not like the branding of the airline.	1
Very comfortable leather seat. Quick boarding at TXL. They gave snacks and drinks during the flight from TXL to VCE. Very polite and friendly crew.	1
We flew Economy with Air Berlin as it was the only carrier that offered a flight from Naples to Stockholm at a good price and we were pleasantly surprised with the whole experience after reading quite a few negative comments in this forum. There was a 3 hour stopover at Berlin Tegel which wasn't great but no issues whatsoever with Air Berlin. Both flights left on time aircraft was newish and clean service was pleasant despite a fully loaded plane and they also threw in coffee and a sandwich. No inflight entertainment but hey on a 2 hour flight who needs it? We were very happy with what was delivered for the price (Italy to Sweden for just $200) and I wouldn't hesitate to use them again.	1
We were due to fly from Edmonton to Las Vegas and our flight was cancelled due to bad weather in Vegas. The airline was very nice to put us up in a hotel in Edmonton for the night, give us $20 of food passes for the airport and $40 food passes for the hotel for supper. It was not their fault that the weather in Las Vegas was poor so we appreciated what they did for us even though we felt they did not have to! We also received a $200 credit each so a total of $400 towards our next flights booked with them! How amazing we were very shocked to receive the email while in Vegas about the credit. I don’t normally have time to write reviews but I had to for this and feel Air Canada went out of their way to make us feel a little less sad that we had to stay one day of our vacation in Edmonton rather than Vegas! Thank your Air Canada you really went over and above!	1
First time with Aeroflot. Short two hour flights Moscow to Astrakhan and back. Great on time flights, modern and clean aircraft, nice cabin crew, professional and polite. Aeroflot uniform definitely among the most stylish cabin crew uniforms. All in all, really great job.	1
Istanbul to Hong Kong via Moscow. The Aeroflot flight from Istanbul was delayed a few hours, and would have appreciated some information about this delay. However Aeroflot staff were outstanding at helping us to transfer to our Moscow to Hong Kong leg. Flew business class and had to be amongst the best. Great flat bed and excellent cabin service. Food well presented and of a good quality. They even provided fresh flowers and white linen tablecloth with Bollinger champagne. The wine list was outstanding. Would definitely recommend Aeroflot especially business class which is excellent value for money.	1
I flew Aegean Airlines from Athens to Stockholm Arlanda in December. The flight was full, so the ground staff asked us kindly if we'd like to check our luggage for free. Onboard, the plane was clean and modern. We were served a full breakfast, and the flight attendants came around a lot with rounds of drinks. I really like Aegean cabin crew because they are very kind, polite and helpful. We arrived in Stockholm 30 minutes earlier, where we collected our luggage from the carousel. The only thing I'd like to mention is that most of the time Aegean does not use the jetbridges in Athens airport, even when they are available, and the passengers have to go to the plane by bus. Overall an excellent experience and for me is the best carrier in Europe.	1
Dusseldorf to Madrid. Air Berlin is a very nice airline. They gave everyone a complementary sandwich and a drink. Entertainment was okay just a little hard if you are a bit far from the dropdown screen. Staff very helpful.	1
Aeroflot from Los Angeles to Moscow, and a really amazing business class service, the best I have had. The flight attendants served food that was restaurant quality. Dinner was served with a rose and there were a lot of little extras. They had excellent toiletries in the bathrooms, and offered slippers in business class. They had as many English language movies and TV shows on a Russian airline as I would have found on an American one. The seats are fairly standard for international business class, I have seen the same model on El Al and almost the same model on American Airlines.	1
I have never left a review before, but after our flight from New York to Moscow with Aeroflot I wanted to. The service we received is so much better than in the US. I am flying alone with a baby in my arms (age 1.5 years). We were provided with a cot onboard and baby food, and during the flight baby I rested and staff were super. So much attention and care from Aeroflot staff. Thank you. I will always fly Aeroflot.	1
London to Mexico City return. Excellent flight, marvelous staff and great value for money. Both flights were fantastic: on time, easy check-in and check-out, the staff was helpful and friendly, comfortable seats, clean plane overall. I was pleasently surprised by the food quality. I ordered a vegetarian meal and got 2 delicious meals that consisted of a fruit plate, salad with dressing, bread and a main curse that changed: curry rice with broccoli, roasted vegetables with a promodoro sauce, vegetable stir fry and chilaquiles with beans.	1
Flew FRA-TXL-SZG. Excellent Airline. Food was good. Helps so much to have a few screens to look at during a flight. The staff were so kind. The funny thing I noticed was they advertise more for Etihad than they do for themselves. Would definitely fly them again.	1
Flew from Stockholm to Athens on Aegean Airlines. Had only cabin baggage so I went straight to the gate. The airplane was at the gate on time, but the boarding was a mess, ending up having a 20 min delay. The cabin was clean and modern. The crew was excellent, carrying out lots of rounds of services. The hot meal was nice and delicious. They also offered 3 rounds of drinks. The captain kept keeping us informed about the flight. Arrived in Athens with a 20 min delay. The only thing I would recommend is to install some sort of IFE apart from the overhead screens. I've flown Aegean a lot of times, and I would certainly choose them again.	1
I had a great trip with Aeroflot. Great food, new and clean airplanes, and friendly, helpful crew. Flights were comfortable and on time. They had a great selection of entertainment - lots of English options too.	1
The flight was OK and comfortable. The price was the best on the market and the service was amazing. The planes were clean and new and all of my flights were without any troubles. I would like to say thanks to Aeroflot and its staff.	1
Flight Amsterdam - Acapulco via Mexico City in economy class. Flight to Mexico City on brand new Boeing 787-9. Seats in economy were good, decent width and leg room. Also inflight entertainment made a good impression on me. Touchscreens were responsive, quite big and provided good quality. Choice of movies, definitely not as large as on Emirates but still sufficient, even for a long 12 hour flight. Service during the whole flight was very good, cabin crew were kind and attentive. Connecting flight to Acapulco on Embraer 190, which is my favourite regional jet. Seats on this airplane are really comfortable. I really enjoyed flying Aeromexico! Excellent price-value ratio!	1
Athens to Larnaca. I did not have any baggage problem at all. Everyone has to download the Aegean app and make a miles and bonus account for special offers and upgrades! You can have all the information about your flight (gate,time etc) and your boarding pass in your hand. On the airplane now, cabin crew was kind and friendly, we departed on time from ATH. The food delicious and my seat very comfortable (7A).	1
Amazing. One of my best trips from Berlin to Athens. Very friendly cabin crew. Nice, modern and clean cabin. The food was delicious. On time arrival and departure. I was curious about the P.A (pilot announcement) if they will inform us about the flight and so they did 3 times. Before take-off at cruising altitude and before landing. I am going to fly again and again with them.	1
Great experience from Krakow to Athens. Having flown mostly low-cost airlines, it was a great change to fly with Aegean. Despite the low ticket price the service was better than other major airlines I have flown with. Seats were comfortable, food was nice (had vegetarian option) and there were lots of drinks available. The cabin crew was really nice and helpful. Despite a slight delay with the departure, we landed on time in Athens. The only thing that was a bit annoying was that the queue for bag drop for people with printed boarding passes took longer than the one for people without them (I thought it was quite unusual) and I had to rush to the gate after checking my luggage. But all in all, amazing experience, would definitely recommend.	1
Flew Aegean Airlines from Bucharest to Toulouse via Athens. This is the second time in a few months that I have had superb value for money from this airline. All flights were on time - in yesterday's case, half an hour early. This airline must be one of the few in Europe which still gives you something decent to eat and a glass of wine in the afternoon. The cabin crew were friendly and attentive. However, what really impressed me was the space between seats. All flights have been a very comfortable experience and excellent value for money.	1
Flew Cologne-Berlin/TXL return. Modern aircraft both flights with Boeing 737-700 one brand new with Dreamliner interior very nice. Good service from flight crew got 2 drinks and offered sweet or salty snack. Crew was nice and smiling. Pilot informed during flight and arrived on time in Berlin. Baggage was quick on belt. TXL is an old airport and that is not to blame Air Berlin for that. Return flight was nice as well crew gave me a 3rd hot drink that was a nice touch. Plane was not full and the service was nice and with a smile. Much better than Germanwings. I wish Air Berlin would fly CGN-HAM.	1
The flight was pleasant. Boarding was in order with Mandarin and English. Waiting area was clean and spacious. Plane interior clean and comfortable. Spacious seat for average size persons. Flight attendants are helpful.  Food was good and adequate. Touched down to LAX was the perfect. I see no problem with AQir China and will take this airline again if the price is right. This ticket was 20% cheaper than other airlines.	1
We flew from Toronto, Canada (YYZ) to Providenciales, Turks and Caicos (BPV) for vacation. Everything was amazing the crew was easily 5 stars, we met one of the flight attendants at the gate and saw our kids looking at all the planes, she offered them to sit in the cockpit once we made it to our destination. The kids enjoyed the flight. The flight came with complimentary drinks, the food did cost extra we didn't purchase but other passengers were saying it was well worth it. The IFE had lots of options and the WIFI was very fast. The pilots made a very soft landing we deboarded in 5 minutes, we did deboard last because the pilots let the kids stay in the cockpit for a bit, they learned so much! Overall definitely fly with Air Canada had a great experience.	1
Really an excellent new premium economy product. Almost as wide a seat as business class without the full recline. I have an allergy problem and they ran out of the meal option in premium economy that I could eat, so the attendants gave me a meal from business class. The service in premium economy was really what I would have expected in business class, constantly serving drinks and providing service. Amazing value for the money. Brand new in-flight entertainment system on the B777-300ER, same day / night destination time zone synchronization lighting (i.e. blue during the day time at destination) as is found on the new Boeing 787. Bath rooms had extra amenities, wet wipes, deodorants, and hand towels. Beyond my expectations for Premium Economy (which they reffer to as comfort class).	1
Mexico City to London. This was our fourth flight with Aeromexico in the last two weeks. Flying from London to Mexico City. Then to Huatulco. Then Oaxaca to Mexico City. And finally back to London. I can say that this is now probably one of my favourite airlines having travelled around the world for many years on many airlines. Friendly staff. Helpful. Very comfortable seats. Slept more on these planes than others. Great food and drink. Easy check in on their website or at airport. Good prices. Would recommend them as an airline. Surprised as their reviews are not so good so wasn't expecting much. But so happy to have used them. Best thing was the wonderful Tequila after their meals. It was an amazing taste. Great films.	1
Athens to Helsinki. I've travelled with Aegean Airlines many times in the past few years. I decided to finally write a review, seeing the consistency of service - a single positive or negative experience can be attributed to chance, but I think safer conclusions can be drawn after having the same experience time after time after time. And my experience of Aegean Airlines has always been stellar. The plane was clean, in good condition (this time I flew with one of their new A320ceo - those with "sharklets" at the wing tips), inspiring reliability. The crew were friendly in a genuine way - it's amazing how easy it is to spot fake smiles - and gave the impression they truly care for the passengers. Leg room must be among the best, I've never felt squeezed in an Aegean plane. In-flight service is miles ahead of anyone else. You get a warm meal with drinks (including alcoholic ones, such as wine or beer), coffee/tea, before-take-off candy, and there were even gifts for children.  I'm baffled by some people who claim Aegean's in-flight entertainment is lacking, and I applaud Aegean's decision to show instead a truly beautiful video displaying the many places worth visiting in Greece. Flight-deck crew provide information to the passengers along the way.  All in all, it's hard to find any flaws. If I absolutely had to pick something, I'd say that sometimes the aisle seems a bit clogged - probably as a result of the cabin crew being busy serving passengers. I think Aegean fully deserves its "best regional airline" designation, as you get a lot of value for your money. Their prices are more than reasonable, and when you realize how much you get for what you pay, the result is totally worth it. No chance I'd fly with anyone else on my way to/from Greece	1
Excellent service and after support. My car seat was missing, they refunded the amount. I had issues with my flight in Toronto and they have returned hotel and other expenses. Keep up the good work.	1
Mykonos to London via Athens. This was my first time flying with Aegean. My ticket said that the first sector would be operated by Olympic Air but that was not the case - it was on an Aegean aircraft. The first sector from JMK-ATH was very short (less than 30 minutes in the air) but the crew offered sweets before take off, then a hand wipe and a small snack. The transfer in ATH was only 40 minutes but there were "transfer ambassadors" to make this process go smoothly. The second sector from ATH-LHR was very busy but the service (from the immaculately groomed crew) was first class. There was an initial beverage service, followed by a meal/beverage service followed by hot drinks, the crew were working really hard and provided such a great service. Aegean provides a premium airline experience that is becoming hard to find in the European short-haul market.	1
Nurnberg to Thessaloniki. I almost solely fly Aegean Airlines because they offer Ryanair prices with a Lufthansa comfort and service. On medium haul flights they offer a complementary warm meal, unlike most European airlines. On short haul flights, they offer a snack and and a drink and a coffee. I´d like to add, that I once had my flight anulled due to bad weather, and they offered me a free 5* hotel stay, considering European law does not oblige airlines to offer such things due to bad weather. For me Aegean is Europe's best airline.	1
Vancouver to Osaka. We found this flight comfortable and the crew provided good service. It seems that many people are aggravated by the lack of screens on the back of seats, to provide distraction in flight. We never pay attention to those anyhow, except to track the plane's location. The food was good. The seats were good because recline was quite limited and so the people in front of us did not push back into our space. We got two meals which were palatable. Seating is 2xx2 so we did not have to climb over anyone to get to the aisle. I'd be happy to travel on this aircraft with this airline again.	1
Thessaloniki to Munich. Excellent trip, on time and very good service. Business class is spacious, service friendly and thoughtful. Priority boarding and priority transfer from plane to terminal much appreciated. Good information on board, experienced pilots, smooth landing. Overall a very pleasant experience.	1
Flew LHR to SVO 27/3/15 returned 4/4/15. Outbound A321 return A330-300. Both trips were comfortable with cabin crew all very helpful and pleasant to a non Russian Speaker. We were in economy both ways. The plane was clean the toilets were fine and the food and drinks provided were good for airline food in our family experience. Overall a very pleasant experience No IFE on way out as small plane but lots on way back choice was good.	1
I was extremely satisfied with the flight. The cabin crews are friendly, and frequent water runs over night without asking. Food is not the best but definitely edible, no menu provided. Clean airport, frequent cleaning of toilets and even happy to chat to passengers for the overnight flight in the galley. Aircraft new, seat is normal size for economy class. All flights on time, impressive considering the congestion in Beijing airport. Very satisfied and I will definitely come back.	1
I had a standby ticket for the flight Heraklion to Zurich and onward to final destination Frankfurt with another company. The connecting flight however was 55 minutes after arrival at Zurich. I would like to thank your ticketing/check-in staff to finding the perfect solution for me. I am very impressed by your team and will recommend Aegean Airlines to everyone. Hope to see you again soon.	1
Bucharest to Heraklion via Athens. Superb flight. First when we did the check in the person let us 2 baggages even if we didn't pay for them extra fee so it will be easier for us in the plane. They had great food on board and taking in consideration that we traveled with a 1 year and 2 months baby they gave us extra care. Great Company and I highly recommend it.	1
Aegean is definitely one of the best airlines in Europe - no surprise they keep winning awards. Top level service, excellent food on board, amazingly friendly staff, flights leave and arrive on time, they fly to the best airports (for example, London Heathrow instead of other lower-cost London airports) and they always park at the most convenient gate. Top choice for flying in Europe.	1
Just wanted to give a big warm shoutout to Diana, an amazing flight attendant on the Toronto To Prague flight on Aug 24 (Flight AC1923). She was so personable and helpful during the flight. I watched as she handled many tired and fussy passengers with ease and grace. Diana smiled from the moment we boarded to the minute we landed.	1
Las Vegas to Mexico City. I bought a ticket with prepaid luggage. When I was making web check in the system tried to make me pay again. So we had to make it at the airport. Travelling with senior citizens and staff were very accomodating. FA were nice. The flight included a lunch service. Flight arrive on time.	1
Another high quality experience with Aegean flying from Athens to Berlin. All staff were polite and highly professional, and free hot meals and alcoholic beverages were offered. A thunderstorm in Berlin required a diversion to Leipzig airport for several hours, followed by storm-related problems disembarking at TXL - all handled by the staff calmly, courteously, and with frequent updates - free refreshments were also available during the delay. Some sort of inflight entertainment would have been appreciated. Would be very interested in seeing this airline provide long-haul service.	1
Mytilene to London Heathrow via Athens return. As always, a pleasure to fly with Aegean. Cabin crew were very friendly, efficient and professional, plane was clean. Food was ok, it's not 5 star fine dining but much appreciated even on a 3.5 - 4 hr flight. Lovely wine. Landed early in ATH as is nearly always the case. ATH - MJT was a full flight and about 35 mins in the air with a drinks service followed by a breakfast snack service followed by coffee tea service (those cabin crew were constantly on the move and smiling). One thing that I'm not keen on is the pre allocated seating which is a pain especially if you want a specific seat (extra leg room, I'm 6' 6"). From LHR to ATH I logged on for check in as soon as it opened and there were only approx 13 other seats to select and from ATH to LHR approx 18 seats. Fortunately got an extra legroom seat on outbound but inbound had to ask an agent at the airport if a seat had become available. After a bit of tapping away she gave me extra legroom seats on both inbound flights (very appreciated). Please can we go back to selecting our own seats? Boarding is the usual chaos with no one taking any notice of the announcements (if they're boarding passengers seated at the back you can bet those with seats at the front will go through too) but it's no big deal and in no way reflects on the airline. Will definitely continue using Aegean when flying to Greece though	1
Flew Zurich to Rhodes. I have never been disappointed by Aegean. Online check-in process is straight-forward, with just a few clicks whereas with several other airlines you have to go through more steps. The plane was delayed for 15 min because of traffic in Zurich but the captain and the crew were updating passengers constantly. Leg space was more than average. Food was good for such a short (and inexpensive) flight. But what makes the big difference in every flight is the crew. They go beyond the formal politeness of crew members and do not hesitate to show more of their human side. It is nice to see how they speak spontaneously to the passengers, make jokes, and are very caring and enthusiastic with children. Please, keep doing the great work and you will always have your loyal passengers.	1
I wanted to give a shout out to the Air Canada staff working the counter in St, Johns NL on March 3 2023 at 5 am. Myself and my wife got held up in Security that morning going on a family vacation to Orlando. Long story short we missed our flight because of the delay and the staff at Air Canada were so great they got us on the next flight to Toronto to catch up with the rest of the family in Toronto. All my years of flying the service and attitude of Air Canada staff was so Fantastic and bent over backwards to help us. A special Thank You to you all at the check in counter and at the gate - will definitely be flying our next trip with Air Canada.	1
I have an upcoming flight. I made a mistake in entering my wife’s maiden name instead of her married, legal name. Air Canada was extremely clear, helpful, and responsive in resolving this issue. This started with their actually promptly answering the phone. I’ve been on hold with Aer Lingus for over 100 minutes, but was on hold with Air Canada for 30 seconds. This makes a difference. And the person who answered was very easy to understand and articulate - a native English speaker. I was anxious about the problem and asked a number of questions, on the phone and by email. In every case they responded quickly and clearly, making the resolution happen. I just needed a marriage certificate. They assured me they could resolve it promptly and when I did send the certificate it was resolved in a few hours. I’ve had very different experiences, say with Spirit Airlines. Not sure if it is resolved with them or not.	1
I flew from Copenhagen to Tokyo with a stop-over en Moscow SVO. It was a very positive experience. Aeroflot has gone through a large modernization programme in the recent years and it was very evident when I travelled with them. Most of their fleet now consists of modern airliners such as the A320 the A330 and the Boeing 777. I flew on their A320 from CPH to SVO. For a short-haul flight the onboard service was extremely good compared to most European airlines. The food consisted of fresh bread cheese beef and a delicious cake and the cabin crew were serving cold and hot drinks throughout the whole flight. The crew was extremely friendly. Since the plane was only half full many of the passengers were lying down across the seats. The cabin crew immediately offered them blankets and pillows to make them more comfortable. This is the first time I have experienced this on a European flight. The transfer at SVO was smooth and easy. The airport has been renovated and now offers an easy access between the terminals without having to go outside the airport. The passport and security check took less than 10 minutes much to my surprise and I was now standing in Terminal D which had a wide selection of restaurants shops as well as free WiFi. The flight to Tokyo was on an A330. The interior felt fresh and new and the seats were very comfortable although for a tall guy such as myself the legroom left much to be desired but that is not the fault of the airline. The cabin crew on this flight were fluent in English and Japanese. Again very friendly people. There was a passenger in front of me who seemed rather anxious about flying and kept calling the crew throughout the whole flight. They never ignored his calls or talked bad to him. They kept smiling and did what they could to make him feel comfortable. The food was again very tasty and the menu offered both Russian and Japanese dishes and despite the rather cramped space I had a very comfortable flight to Tokyo. I have read many negative reviews about Aeroflot and I will not deny that people might have had some bad experiences but my opinion on Aeroflot is that it is a modern airline that offers some of the cheapest tickets in the world while maintaining a high standard in customer service. I have already booked my next flight with Aeroflot and I will continue to fly with them whenever possible.	1
Again, a very nice experience with Aegean Airlines. I was flying from Warsaw to Santorini via Athens with a layover there. First flight was very nice, left almost on time. I have pre-ordered Halal meal for this flight and I must say it was one of the best meals I have ever had. Athens airport has got a bit better from last year, so it was easy to connect there and I was also able to get some sleep at the airport. Second flight was leaving at 5.15am, the boarding via a bus was a bit chaotic but managable, flight was very short and we also received a chocolate croissant.	1
Berlin to Athens. Aegean has been my preferred airline when traveling to and from Greece. The aircraft are new, clean, and have a lot of leg space. The staff are very friendly and the food and beverage are one of the top I have had in regional flights. Flight are time never causing me delays. Also the price is very good. An excellent airline and highly recommended.	1
TXL to SOF return. Really can't complain about their short haul product - both flights were on time a drink and a snack offered and crew on both legs were friendly enough. At least the short haul service is comparable to established airlines such as Lufthansa or BA. Will definitely use them again in the future.	1
Los Angeles to Hong Kong return via Beijing. I am handicapped and need a wheel chair in airports. I loved every minute on this flight. The food was different, but I wanted to begin my Chinese experience this way. I liked most of it. The beverage choice was great andt entertainment system was fast. I appreciated the kindness of flight attendants, once I sat she came over and took off my shoes and put on slippers. Later on, I went to the toilet and when I returned she helped me turn down my bed and tucked me in.  Upon landing was instructed to remain in the aircraft until all passengers deplaned so the wheelchair would be available. The toilets were kept clean. Beijing to Hong Kong portion was in economy, but the service remained as good. I shall fly this airline again.	1
I had a flight into Edmonton for a few meetings, and was scheduled to fly out immediately the next day. Somehow, I managed to join the same flight attendant crew on both flights. The Service Director, Dimitry, recognized me on the second flight and gave me a handwritten card expressing the crew's appreciation for little old me, economy class passenger, who was rushing to get home. What a nice touch! I showed it to my colleague who does the flight bookings for everyone in our office who's said she's never seen anything like that before. I really appreciated that kind gesture and excellent attention to detail! Air Canada is lucky to have such incredible and thoughtful staff.	1
Athens to Milano. I think that Aegean has a very good economy class product for short haul flights within Europe. Seat is quite comfortable and since you can book your seat 48hrs in advance using the echeckin services, you can select an emergency exit row free of charge. Lot of other airlines will charge you with 15 to 20 euros for such a seat. Then it is one of the few airlines which still serve a hot meal. For the flight between Athens to Milano other companies serve a cold sandwich. We have been served a hot breakfast plus yougurt with honey, juices and coffee. Plane departed with 15 minutes delay but we arrived on time	1
WAW-TXL-AUH-HKT-AUH-TXL-WAW. Flight from WAW to TXL on a new Bombardier Q400 short and smooth. Flights from TXL to AUH and from AUH to HKT on the A330-200 were half empty so it was very comfortable having 4 seats in the middle row to sleep all by myself. Same thing on the way back. Service was great as well I can't complain at all.	1
Like I indicated below - nothing but excellent. Flew from LAX to Mokba and back. Very outstanding service. Check in easy quick and efficient. The food flying back from Mokba was very good. Sat in the first row right were the bathrooms are and was very impressed how ALL flight attendants were constantly checking and cleaning the bathrooms (our American airlines should really take notice of that. Their bathrooms are not clean - to say the least). Also the flight stats are throughout the whole flight very nicely displayed - including nearest towns at what direction and distance - never saw that with our airlines. It also shows "pilot view" of take-off and landing - loved that. Actually could recognize all people on the ground shortly before touch down watching the descending airplane at LAX with flashes going off like crazy. In the future I will try to book Aeroflot wherever available.	1
Flew Aegean Airlines from Athens to Copenhagen. Absolutely perfect. Nice staff and very friendly with us. A brand new and clean aircraft with very good inflight entertainment. Lastly the food was very good and tasteful but the ticket was a little bit expensive.	1
This is not the first time that I've flown on Aegean Airlines. Every time I've use this airline I was satisfied. This time however from Kalamata to Lyon it might be the best flight I ever taken. I did my check-in online which went fine. The check-in line up at Kalamata airport was fine the waiting was not very long. The flight was on time and even landed at Lyon earlier than scheduled. The only entertaiment was the airline's magazine. The cabin crew was probably the best that I ever experienced. The service was amazing with a tasty hot meal on a short flight. Also the flight attendants were nice and friendly and even went the extra mile by asking me if needed anything else. Overall Aegean airline is probably one of the best short haul airlines. I would not hesitate to fly back with them even if I need to make a connection into a different city.	1
Dublin to Chicago. I do so wish that airlines would reflect their nationality in their food. Asian airlines do, to an extent, and i suppose Alitalia and Aair France serve something that identifies them. But sadly most airlines don’t. Chicken or fish, you get the idea. But on Aer Lingus a small revelation. An unpromising main course was “chicken in a savoury sauce” but the entire lunch was Ireland on a plate. Soda bread, a salmon starter, irish cheese but the entree sang out, “ this is Ireland” I can’t explain it more. The whole flight was very pleasant- service, seating, all pretty good. But that simple lunch will stay in my memory for a long time	1
I flew Dublin To Boston return with Aer Lingus on an A330. Pre-clearance at Dublin is great as one then arrives in US as a domestic flight. Left an hour late due to TSA hold up. Return flight 90 minutes late leaving, minor mechanical issue. Had exit row seat and no one next to me on return. Crew very good both ways.	1
Air Berlin from TXL to VCE and back. Everything went extremely smoothly. Free seat next to me (as a Topbonus Gold member) pre-ordered food was on board and very nice (Indian vegetarian curry) cabin crew very friendly and professional both flights a few minutes ahead of schedule luggage among the first 5 bags on belt. Air Berlin at its best!	1
I had wheelchair assist all the way from Melbourne to Beijing, to Guangzhou, back to Beijing and home to Melbourne as find walking a long way with two artificial knees a problem. They were fantastic. The food was great. I flew night time both ways and water was being offered with the hostess walking up the aisles all night if you wanted it. On board entertainment was great. Could not fault the airline.	1
Athens to Istanbul in August 2016. I have flown Aegean over a dozen times over the past 3 years . I travel to Greece almost every year from Australia and one of the most enjoyable parts is the service from Aegean Airline cabin crew. I have been recently upgraded to Silver Aegean Miles + Bonus and have been given two complimentary business class upgrades that I will be using this year. I recommend Aegean Airlines to anyone who travels in and around Europe on routes offered by the Airline.	1
After a multi-year hiatus from flying Air Canada due to poor past performance, we we absolutely astonished. This is not the Air Canada of yesteryear this felt like a brand-new airline. Gate agents were smiling, in-flight team was excellent, seat pitch was fine and seat comfort excellent, even for my 6’2” frame. Food was excellent and well-priced. IFE was superb and the Thales multi-featured moving map is outstanding. Great job AC.	1
It was my first flight with Aeroflot from LAX to Rome Italy through Moscow. It was a very pleasant flight and definitely will fly them again. The flight was on time the food excellent FA's were very polite and in Moscow City Aeroport Sheremetyevo the accommodation was superb. There is a Capsule hotel on 3rd floor and for 4 hours $103 we got a nice clean room with comfortable beds and a bathroom.	1
Barcelona to Athens. Due to the Easter season, all passengers were given chocolate Easter eggs. The flight was on time. The airplane was very clean, along with the bathroom. Hot towels with lavender scent were provided, and a welcome drink was given. The food was excellent. The seats were leather, and reclined well. The airline magazine was available to every passenger, while a tour of Greece and Cyprus played on overhead TV's. Inflight shopping was available. The crew spoke good English. One of the best flights I have even been on, and would certainly fly with Aegean Airlines again.	1
I traveled onboard Aer Lingus flight 136 to Dublin last night. The experience was excellent and professional from check-in to landing into Dublin Airport. The ground crew were excellent. The onboard experience was wonderful with fantastic cabin crew who warmly greeted all passengers as they boarded the aircraft. My seat of 11-C was very comfortable with plenty of legroom. The service was excellent throughout the flight. Beverages kept flowing throughout the flight. The meal service was excellent. I have to say it was the best flight I have had and I greatly appreciate flying with my country's flag carrier. Aer Lingus, please keep up the great service.	1
Called Air Canada from Frankfurt to change my flight, was not able to do this online. The customer service rep was incredible, she was able to assist me, after I tried to do it myself for over an hour online. This was the best customer service experience I have ever had from any airlines. This representative did what I couldn't do in a couple of minutes. I waited less than 5 minutes on hold, I will recommend Air Canada to my family, friends and everyone else.	1
Flew from Athens to Frankfurt. The aircrafts are new and clean. The crew always have a big smile and are ready to assist the passengers with any problem. The pilots are experienced and I always feel comfortable flying with Aegean. The food quality is excellent and the quantity is adequate. My first choice when I fly.	1
Hamburg to Athens. The flight was excellent, very punctual and the crew are really very friendly. I received an excellent service. A delicious meal was also offered. They offer everything for free including drinks. The crew care about you with a very warm smile.	1
Paris (Orly) - Berlin (Tegel) short haul flight and very pleased with this airline. Plane was a fairly new 737-700 comfortable clean nice lighting and professional attendants. On time departure well maybe 5 minutes late but arrived in Berlin ahead of schedule. Nice snacks and beverages at no cost. All in all I do recommend this airline from my experience.	1
A good flight from Calgary to Frankfurt in premium economy. There was a slight initial delay due to weather on the departure end, but time was made up once we were in the air. The service was friendly as usual, and the plane was clean. Entertainment was good, with a choice of many genres of movies in different languages. The intercom system wasn't working too well, with the result that the safety announcements weren't fully audible - but everyone knows all about those anyway. I'm flummoxed by the negative reviews on this site, particularly in areas that the airlines themselves have no control over (weather delays, seat designs, etc). But I have personally never had an issue with Air Canada rouge.	1
Thessaloniki to Munich. It is the best airline I have flown and Aegean airlines respects each passeger. Flight only lasted two hours and the meal offered is not common in short flights operated by other airlines in Europe. Cabin crew is so nice. I recommend everyone to use this airline.	1
Amsterdam to Rhodes. It is a pleasure flying with Aegean Airlines. The crew is friendly and the service is one of those you rarely find. Aegean Airlines is a company with personality always behave its clients as it should, and I am always satisfied with its services.	1
Very pleasant flight from Berlin Tegel to Athens. Flight was a bit more expensive than the competition, but still cheap (47EUR for a one way ticket). It was really worth though, cause the flight time was much more civilized (11.15am). The flight was about 50% full, there was plenty of space and no issues with hand luggage. Departed and arrived on time. Ordered the kosher meal, which was really great in terms of both quality and quantity. Plenty of drinks (food and drinks are included in the price of the ticket). Choice of seat also for free, so I requested an emergency exit seat. All in all, a slightly more expensive flight than the low cost competition, but taken into account the ancillary included, the food and drinks, the convenience and the flight times, it was well worth the price. Keep on the good job!	1
Copenhagen to Berlin and Berlin to Paris 28 May and return 5 June Paris to Berlin and Berlin to Copenhagen. Sceptical as the tickets were relatively cheap. Surprised by the excellent service: all flights were clean and well maintained we got a free drink snacks free newspapers and the leg space was reasonable. While leaving the flight we got Air Berlin chocolates from staff with a smile. Staff were kind. Overall I had a very nice and experience and would travel them again.	1
I've always loved Air Canada and their service. I was coming back to Edmonton from Puerto Vallarta a day after Christmas. My friend got really sick before the flight (food poisoning), the flight attendant was very proactive and concerned about my friends condition, she checked up on us several times, offered peppermint/lemon tea to my friend in order to help her upset stomach. She was very accommodating and her fellow crew member was also very kind and tended to our needs. This experience reassures me that in the future if I needed assistance, they will help me with top-notch service just like the experience my friend received.	1
Las Vegas to Calgary. My wife and I flew in Business Class on an Air Canada Rouge flight from Las Vegas to Calgary. Typically, the Business Class service on Rouge is good - on this flight it was exceptional. One Flight Attendant went above and beyond to provide excellent customer service. He made our flight a real pleasure and deserves credit for his efforts. We are very grateful for his care and attentions	1
We sat in seats 2D and 2F. From the check in at the Priority Counter to getting off the aircraft at West Palm Beach, were were exceptionally pleased with the service we received. We would like to mention specifically the wheel chair assistance for my wife and the flight attendant in our cabin. All of them were exceptional. Please pass along our comments to the Air Canada staff	1
Flew Athens to Madrid. Aegean, in business or economy (most of my flights), is the best. Punctuality, cabin service, ground staff, call center, frequent flyer programme is excellent. I only regret that they principally fly A320 instead of A321. Cabin crew are pleasant and professional.	1
Athens to Frankfurt. Overall excellent experience. The flight was fully booked, but boarding was on time, fast and easy. The cabin crew was very friendly and helpful and the flight arrived on time. The only glitch is that one of my suitcases arrived broken, but that is the responsibility of the Frankfurt Airport staff and not the airline. Nonetheless, Aegean offered me a new suitcase for replacement for free.	1
Athens to Milan with Aegean Airlines. Excellent flying experience. Despite the flight being full (and overbooked, however they asked for volunteers to be booked on the next available flight, get compensation and a free ticket) they boarded everyone with small delay and landed us on time. Seat, I was on 2F, clean and very comfortable, featuring excellent legroom space. Staff smiling and very friendly. Meal was a great surprise. They offer a tasteful first and second course, with options and selections of traditional food from various regions in Greece. Wine list was also good. The dessert was a delicious cake served with greek yoghurt.	1
I travelled  from Mytilini to Athens and it was one of the best flights I Have had, with a smooth landing. The seats were comfortable enough. Food was served, even though the flight was only 45 minutes. Aegean Airlines manages to provide better services than other bigger airlines even in shorter routes. Definitely deserves 4 stars.	1
Santiago De Compostela to Dublin with Air Lingus. Crew utterly professional and friendly from the word go. They engaged with passengers and freely struck up conversation with travellers, most of whom had been there to complete the Camino de Santiago. Boarding was well organised and swift, even with only one Iberia gate agent. There was a huge amount of cabin baggage, some of which exceeded the allowance, but the air stewards did their utmost to accommodate all bags and therefore avoided bags having to be placed in the hold and ultimately delay the flight. Flight left and arrived on time. Pilots provided flight information on a couple of occasions. I always enjoy flying Aer Lingus and the crew are a credit to our national carrier.	1
Excellent flying experience from Dublin to New York return.  Aircraft was nearly new, usb socket at seat, great IFE, decent leg room and recline. What stood out most was the exceptional crew, so friendly and helpful. A passenger behind me was feeling poorly and I overheard a flight attendant offering to make this passenger hot water, honey and lemon. That speaks volumes.  The only issue was lost baggage which does happen frequently I believe but even still I rate the flight and airline 10/10.	1
We were delighted with our flights from Chicago to Dublin and then Dublin to JFK on the return leg. Boarding went smoothly and the aircraft was clean and in excellent condition. On our Chicago to Dublin leg the A330 was less than one year old. Entertainment system was excellent with many music and movie choices, which kept both adults and kids entertained. The newer aircraft on the first leg included a USB charging port at each seat. Food was surprisingly good, with a nice roast chicken entree offered on the DUB-JFK leg. Alcoholic beverages were about 6 Euros no free booze in Economy. Seat comfort was actually quite good. I had plenty of leg and knee room despite being over 6 feet tall. Seat padding is a little thin, so if you are sensitive to that you might consider one of those airline seat pads. We were thoroughly impressed by the cabin crew - consistently friendly, helpful, cheerful. Unlike on the American carriers, they did not simply serve the meal and disappear. They were very helpful with our young children as well. Flights left the gate a bit late but arrived on schedule. The captain made such a soft landing at JFK that the whole plane clapped! And I should add the fare we paid was about $500 less than what AA and United were charging. The only negative was the WiFi, which I paid for on the first leg but only worked for about 30 minutes.	1
I would like to thank the amazing crew on flight AC1777 from Puerto Plata to Toronto for bringing the Haloween spirit into our Halloween evening flight, greeting passengers with Happy Halloween wishes dressed with Halloween Head bands and giving out candies to passengers. It was very heartwarming, exciting and pleasant and it made me feel so blessed that I live in such a beautiful and rich in tradition country. Maybe I will be lucky to fly with them again on Air Canada Rouge flights. Thank you also to Captain and his assistant. I fly quite often with Air Canada Rouge and as a senior I am very grateful for great service, great price and safe flights.	1
Cabin crew service remains top class. In an age where most airlines across Europe are abandoning inflight service, Aegean crew made at least three runs delivering drinks. The hot meal served (pastitsio) was superb, together with Greek salad and Greek desert. We were also welcomed on board with a gift-wrapped pomegranate as a lucky charm for the New Year. The plane was new and spotless. The flight was on time. Aegean crew are to be congratulated for their warm welcome and hard work throughout the four hour flight. Flying Aegean is always a treat!	1
Zurich to Toronto. We had bulkhead seats as my husband is 6 foot 7. They were great for him. Even though the flight had a fair amount of turbulence, the crew kept at it with awesome service. We used the entertainment and liked the selections available to us. For us it was the happy crew and the service that made this flight great. Thanks!	1
Toronto to Amsterdam. This was a great flight with super attentive staff. They really had the service ethic down pat. Our seats were very comfortable and as the flight was fairly quiet. The take off and landing were easy and we both arrived as refreshed as you could expect. We will fly with this airline again!	1
9th December from Krasnodar to Moscow Sheremetyevo on Flight SU 1103 and missed the connection to Flight SU 263 to London Heathrow. I flew yesterday on Aeroflot and experienced delays and missed connection through no fault of Aeroflot. I was dealt with by their many ground staff at Sheremetyevo extremely well the plane was modern and well flown and I would strongly recommend them for the service I received. Full marks and strongly recommended.	1
Dublin to London Heathrow return. I was planning a day trip to London, and as I hadn’t travelled through Heathrow for over two years, I was curious to see how it had evolved since 09th July 2014 when Aer Lingus moved their operation from Heathrow Terminal 1 to Terminal 2. At the time, four main benefits arising from moving to T2 were heavily publicised:  Public transport within 15 minutes of landing. Luxurious Gold Circle Lounge within minutes of check in.  State of the art facilities. A seamless faster security and check in process. In addition, this was my first booking since the introduction of Aer Lingus’ loyalty programme, now named “Aer Club”. The booking process on Aer Lingus website remains broadly the same. The three fare types are now named Saver, Plus & Advantage with each earning a different amount of tier credits. One benefit I noticed is that when selecting the Plus fare, all seats are now included as complimentary: heretofore the front rows had to be paid for. As I was travelling within the 30 day window, I was able to check in immediately and print my boarding passes. I arrived at Dublin Airport at 7.00am for my 0845 am flight. I wanted to enquire about changing my seat on the outbound leg, and I called to the Gold Circle check in desk. Staff greeted me with a smile and within seconds had issued me with a new boarding card, and wished me a pleasant flight. My current Aer Club tier is Silver which includes fast track security. Only two people were in front of me and I was airside within a couple of minutes. I had a quick look around the bookshop and made my way to the Lounge, where I was greeted by the same staff with whom I dealt at the Gold Circle desk. We joked about the speed with which she moved from the check-in area to the lounge. Definitely the complete antithesis of the fabled lounge dragon! At approximately 8.20am, I made my way to gate 409 where boarding was underway. There are two separate boarding lines: General and Priority (for Aer Club members, flexible ticket holders) and it works very well. While walking towards the airbridge, passengers sitting in the rear half of the aircraft are directed towards steps at the rear door, and the front half board via the airbridge. This speeds up the boarding process, particularly on busy flights. The A320 was clean , and cabin crew warmly welcomed passengers. After a safety briefing and flight information from the Captain, we were underway quickly. During the flight, I indulged in the Irish Breakfast. Not the cheapest at 10 euro, but very tasty indeed. We landed on time in Heathrow, and after a short taxi were on stand at 11am. We deplaned quickly, and  I was sitting on the Tube at 11.15am.	1
We flew Air Canada Rouge nonstop round trip from Toronto to Venice in July. The equipment in both directions was a Boeing 767-300ER, which was obviously an older aircraft from AC’s livery. My family and I were expecting the worst after reading multiple horrific reviews of AC Rouge online, and it seemed like we were going to pay a serious penalty for the very low advance fare we found to fly their “Premium Rouge” product. Happily, our experience was fantastic and we’d fly this discount airline again in a second. Upon boarding on both ends of our journey, we were offered glasses of water or juice and hot towel service. Meals on both flights were a notch above what I’ve experienced on legacy carriers in US domestic first in recent years everything was served on ceramic plates with stainless silverware and linen napkins. Wine and cocktails were complimentary in this class, and while not a varied menu, the service was generous. The seating is very comfortable seat pitch is listed  as 37”, and that seemed accurate. I am a big guy at 6’2” (1.88m) and 280 lbs (127kg) and was completely at ease with plenty of room to stretch out. The 767 does not have individual air jets for circulation, but this did not bother me on these flights. If you’re concerned it will, you may want to pack a USB-powered fan. Every 2-seat row in premium rouge has a power outlet that accepts 110-220v plugs. When the person in front of you fully reclines, these outlets are tricky to access, so figure it out when you get seated. As mentioned in other reviews, to use in-flight-entertainment on these planes, you need to download the Air Canada app on your iOS or Android device ahead of time, or use the provided iPads onboard (free for Premium, charge for other classes). It works very well and has a decent selection of movies. Note that the onboard streaming system will not work during the flight’s climb-out up to about 10K feet (approx the first 20-30 mins. of the flight). Premium rouge passengers also receive priority boarding and priority baggage handling - our luggage was waiting for us when we cleared customs in Venice, which was very unexpected given our past experience at this airport. Our in-flight crews could not have been more kind or professional legacy carriers in the US could seriously take a lesson from these folks. If you are looking for lie-flat seats and the like, this is not your airline. If you are flying your family for vacation and want a reasonably priced product that offers a very nice international premium economy product, than look no further than Air Canada Rouge.	1
Moscow-Tenerife on A330-300 long haul. The service was incredible (actually as usual on Aeroflot long haul flights in business class compared to short haul it is better). Our plane was delayed but we arrived only 7 minutes later than it was proposed). Cabin was originally designed for EgyptAir and it was very good. Entertainment system has a big variety of films and all films can be watched in either Russian or English. In my opinion Aeroflot on long hauls is much better than the majority of other European airlines.	1
London to Hong Kong via Moscow return. All flights you couldn't fault food of good standard flight attendants smart and professional great selection of entertainment only problem was other passengers getting up before plane had stopped at terminals. You know who you are and it makes life very difficult for the flight attendants.	1
Villahermosa to Oaxaca via Mexico City. I have flown 7 domestic Aeromexico flights since November and have 4 more planned. I've been happy with the service every time. Peanuts in flight - take a sandwich if it's over a meal time! The staff are helpful but do speak Spanish - we are in a Spanish speaking country!  Mexico City terminal 2 is easy and has lots of good / shopping options should you wish them.	1
Beijing to Manila. This is the second time in a year I have flown with Air China, and I can't sing there praises high enough. The price of a ticket for me to fly to the Philippines was cheaper than a return train ticket from London to Edinburgh! I've always believe there level of service is spot on. It's the Chinese national flag carrier so it's going to be catered more towards that culture. But there is plenty of movies, documentaries and music to keep you entertained. The food was perfect and the Chinese beer is excellent. Highly recommend this airline.	1
Beijing to Singapore. With a decent price tag, the meal was tasty, the crews were friendly and professional on the flight, offered drink service after the meal service. Overall I would choose to fly with Air China again.	1
I truly enjoyed my flight from Toronto to San Diego, Cal. The flight was #1887 on March 28th, 2017. The plane was nice and clean and the flight was extremely smooth. However, what made it extremely pleasant was the lead flight attendant. She made announcements in English and impeccable French.  She was tender and extremely helpful. She truly made my day with her bright smile and helpful attitude. She noticed that my head was not comfortable, so without my asking, she brought a pillow. Never seen that before.	1
London to Guadalajara via Mexico City. I flew Aeromexico for the first time to visit my GF's family in Mexico, and I was pleasantly surprised at how good the service was. The journey started at Heathrow Terminal 4 (which is pretty bad) but onboard I was treated to an extent of luxury that some bigger airlines have forgotten. My connection in Mexico City was smooth and well organised with a minimum waiting time for my second flight. A great airline and will recommend to anyone to fly with them.	1
Rome to Athens with Aegean Airlines. The aircraft was very clean and the seats were spotless. But what set the airline apart were the flight attendants, its amazing what a genuine smile can do to a passenger. All the crew seemed genuinely happy to be doing their job. I sat in the row behind my family and spoke to the two ladies beside me and they felt the same way. Getting off I mentioned to one of the girls how I felt and got another genuine smile - well done indeed Aegean.	1
My wife and I flew Aegean Airlines from Santorini to Athens in a Airbus A320, overnight in Athens and on to Heathrow the next day in a Airbus A321. Both flights were full and left and arrived on time. A choc-chip cookie was served on the short Athens leg with a full meal and bar service on the flight to London.	1
Athens to Rome, and my third flight with Aegean Airlines, and they improved their service the last 2 years. For a 2 hour flight the service was equal as a part of an intercontinental flight. No IFE - not sure if need in a short flight with a regional carrier, but in any case not many airlines in Europe offer this value for money. Compliments.	1
Flew Aegean Airlines from London Heathrow to Samos via Athens, and the first time I have flown with this airline. Very good cabin crew, leg room much more then a lot of airlines, I am 6 ft and I still had plenty of leg room. Meal was good and a complementary drink. When I fly in summer I use Thomson (TUI) direct to Samos, but I have to say Aegean Airlines is better, and a better price with more luggage allowance on a flexi ticket. Would recommend and use again.	1
Toronto to Las Vegas. It was not as bad as I thought it would be. Their business class product is not like Air Canada's business class but it had almost the same style of food menu and drinks are served in glass. They had two red wine selections to choose from. Other than the ice cream and fresh baked cookies that you would receive on a long haul west coast flight with Air Canada business class this product was not that bad. Service was outstanding on both legs of this trip from YYZ-LAS and return on the red eye from LAS-YYZ. Only exception and difference is the seat on the B767-300 business class on rouge is not a sleeper pod seat like you would have found on Air Canada business class. Also note that the name for business class on Air Canada Rouge is Premium Rouge.	1
Flew Air Canada rouge from Las Vegas to Calgary. Excellent service from the Montreal based cabin crew. Flew economy but purchased meal at time of booking. Served a meal from business class along with a warm fresh bread roll. Watched a movie on my Samsung Tablet via streaming player service of the airline. I am 5'10" and found the seats adequate. I would fly with them again for certain.	1
Flew with Aegean Airlines on January 17 from Athens to Frankfurt. The flight was nearly full but the cabin crew did a great job at providing everyone with a full meal service and two rounds of drink service. We left and arrived on time without any hassles. There is a lot of legroom available and the seats were very comfortable.	1
I really enjoyed this flight with Air Canada. The Toronto Maple Leaf Lounge was comfortable with some excellent food on offer and I was able to find a very comfortable chair and get some work done. The flight was delayed a little but we arrived in Vancouver on-time. Overall it was a smooth ride with little turbulence. The Dreamliner is a very comfortable quiet plane and one of my favorites in the Air Canada fleet. The staff were friendly and attentive. I like the Air Canada app as I was able to pick out the films I wanted to watch and I appreciated all the choices. There are quite a few I look forward to watching on my next flight. It was great having access to wifi. Dinner and the wine were excellent. I appreciate I can review the menu on the Air Canada app before the flight. This year it has been great to be back traveling and I'll continue to be a regular customer. I look forward to my next flight.	1
Larnaca to Athens and a great flight with Aegean Airlines. Departed on-time after a quick boarding. The inflight meal consisted of a cheese pastry followed by 2 beverage services. The flight was quick, enjoyable and comfortable. We landed early and disembarked right away.	1
One more nice experience with Aegean Airlines! On time both flights, great flight attendants, good food and very clean cabin. Cannot ask anything more. Load factor was around 80% on ATH-MAD and 90% on MAD-ATH. Only thing is that they have to improve their in-flight entertainment	1
London to Athens with Aegean Airlines. Polite and easy check in. Efficient boarding with priority given to Business Class. Welcome was with a smile and very courteous crew. Spotless aircraft. Drinks served swiftly followed by excellent meal from a menu with 2 choices of main. Good selection of wines including some award winning Greek ones. Hot towels again served by polite and elegant crew. Landed early. An excellent airline and recommended.	1
MIA-DUS Business Class. Boarding quick and on time arrival in Dusseldorf on time. Business class is not comparable to others as the seats don't fully recline. This was more than compensated by very comfortable seats and a seat distance which is quite generous - you can easily step over neighbours seat. Crew was friendly and attentive. In view of the price business class is value for money if you don't need full recline on your seat but favour more space and friendly service.	1
This was my first trip anywhere since the pandemic (2019) & even longer since I flew with Air Canada. I was hesitant, but I was impressed with Air Canada. Minimal delays & good service - to Peru & back. But I want to give a special shout out to Adelfredo (I hope I have spelled his name correctly). He is a ticketing agent at Miami Airport. He really assisted me today. He was at that desk since 6am & he still had a smile on his handsome face.  I really appreciated everything you did for me.  To Air Canada, please keep up the good work. I don't like to hear or read bad reviews about anything that says Canada.	1
Business class Vancouver to Dusseldorf. AB uses the Priority Pass lounge at YVR which was fine. No current newspapers due to a delivery problem but when asked about this the concierge immediately went and purchased a copy. Business Class was only half full at the end of AB's summer schedule. Food was fantastic - a choice of four entrees plus a fifth 'special' dish available. Seats in Business are old type non-flat bed with limited video choices however they were comfortable. On time arrival in Dusseldorf which is an easy airport to navigate. A great bargain and a great flight.	1
Have flown London to Athens and Athens - Mykonos route many times and find the same high level of service. Cabin crew with smart uniforms and the welcome is with a smile. Boarding was quick and flight time was just 25 minutes. No drinks are served as the flight time is too short, but we were given sweets and a croissant. Aircraft was clean and seats were comfortable. I am puzzled as to why Aegean Airlines has not been upgraded to a 4 star airline. Their level of service is better than some 4 star carriers. 	1
Mykonos to Athens with Aegean Airlines. Check in was easy despite a queue. Ground staff were polite and efficient using perfect English. Aircraft was an A319, spotless interior and welcomed on board by very elegant and immaculately dressed cabin crew with sincere smiles. A tray of sweets was offered to passengers once seated. On time departure and only a 20 minute flight, the crew still served individually wrapped croissants, napkins and refreshment wipes before landing. All served without stress or fuss. Upon deplaning, again the goodbye was sincere with a smile and a thank you. Aegean are a great airline whom I thoroughly recommend.	1
Aegean Airlines from Santorini to Zurich via Athens, and after many cancelled flights from Athens there were many unhappy customers in the Santorini airport. The staff were fantastic and professional. Considering the bad mood of people they were as helpful as they could be. We flew them a few times during our trip and every time was a great experience. The flight attendants were  great, the pilots very informative and flew a smooth flight every time. The meals and snacks provided were a good surprise. They made our time in Europe great. Thank you Aegean Airlines for a great anniversary trip.	1
Excellent service from take off to landing on Aegean Airlines flight from Athens to Manchester. Cabin crew are immaculate, efficient and professional. Aircraft was clean and comfortable, take off and landing exceptionally smooth. Looking forward to flying with Aegean airlines again soon. Thank you for a pleasant journey.	1
Birmingham to San Francisco via Dublin was my first international flight with Aer Lingus and I would fly with them again. I became aware of them by chance when seeking flights to San Fransisco to visit my daughter. Usually I fly from one of the London airports which is not very convenient, flying from Birmingham via Dublin with connecting flights was seamless with Aer Lingus. Another advantage was pre-clearing American Customs and Immigration at Dublin airport, again seamless and extremely well managed. The flight in economy was in my opinion as good, or better than other major carriers and the price was very competitive. I found Aer Lingus Staff, both on the ground and the cabin Staff to be courteous, friendly and helpful. 	1
TXL-BKK return. Nice FA's on both flights. Leg Room could be bigger but was ok. Meals where hot and of good taste. No Delay. Luggage was there on time and without any damages.	1
My first flight with Aeromexico on the Boeing 787. Online check in quick and easy. Seat was very good with ample legroom and comfort. Food was excellent. Staff were very courteous, attentive rand well mannered.  This trip was equal to any BA flight I've been on. A couple of minus points. Our seating area had not been cleaned very well and the earphones were broken but the latter problem was resolved very quickly. I will certainly use Aeromexico again.	1
I was very happy with the service from Aegean Airlines flying from ATH to CDG. Check-in was smooth and very easy. Then headed to the lounge, as I am a Gold member of their frequent flier program, Miles and Bonus. The lounge wasn't anything special, but it was still nice to relax with a beer before take-off. The flight itself was great. Cabin crew were very attentive, helpful, and friendly during boarding. They even spoke French. The hot meal provided in economy class along with the nice selection of beverages (including alcohol), was delicious. The plane I was on seemed new and very clean. In general, Aegean made my flying a real pleasure, and I will not hesitate choose them again for my travels in Europe!	1
I have flown with Aer Lingus a few times to cross the Atlantic, the staff are always pleasant and helpful. The food and service is also great. Economy leg room isn't great but not the worst I have seen. The inflight entertainment on the aircraft I was on - EI-EWR was terrible, the videos constantly froze and didn't work at all which was a first for me as on other Aer Lingus planes I have been on the entertainment worked fine. The wifi service however did work fine during the flight, there was a slight interruption of coverage but it was fine otherwise. My flight was to Boston with Aer Lingus then onward to Detroit with JetBlue. I booked it all with Aer Lingus. Overall a great airline as expected from the national Irish airline.	1
STR-HAM one way. Very pleasant flight no lines at check-in on time nice cabin crew one round of drinks with choice of cookies or crackers 737-700 clean and well prepared. Pitch between seats could be one or two inches more. Cheap fare since we booked 4 months in advance. Overall: very good!	1
The two crew ladies at the boarding door were very polite and courteous. They have maintained a smooth flow of passengers and are courteous to people on wheelchair. Her announcements are very clear. It's a packed flight. Crew members are cooperative.	1
I had booked an Economy Ticket through Aegean Airlines.com. Which was very easy website. At my check-in it wasn't possible to sit in Economy Class because it was full, so they changed me into the Business Class. What a great experience. It was my first time in Business Class. First a drink before take off, an appetizer, hot meal that I could chose and a dessert. And before landing one spirit. Drinks as much as I wanted.  I would really recommend Aegean Airlines if you travel in Europe to Greece.	1
This airline is a pleasure to fly. Courteous and professional flight attendants, clean cabins, meals and alcoholic beverages served for free on international flights, even candies distributed before take off. It seems that Aegean Airlines took a look back to the nicer days of flying and made sure to bring back all of the now-missing elements of a pleasant flying experience. Highly recommended.	1
Liverpool to Dublin with Aer Lingus. Can't express enough my thanks and appreciation for making my first ever flight such a wonderful experience. The cabin crew were excellent and once they found out it was my first flight at the age of 71, they went out of their way to offer me reassurance. They even offered me a local newspaper and provided me with a glass of proseco. I would highly recommend the cabin crew and Aer Lingus for their professionalism and making my journey pleasurable.	1
Our flight was with Aer Lingus from Dublin to London Heathrow, they were brilliant with my son, who is an adult on the autism spectrum, so he was happy just to be on the plane. The seats were very comfortable for an A320. Loved that they played good music whilst we were waiting and the captain kept us up to date as to when we would leave. Inflight the food service was good, staff very professional and made you feel welcome on board. I would fly with them again.	1
FRA-TXL-BKK in C. Very friendly staff. Good Menus. Super service from BKK-Pattaya free Limousine service. Sure we fly again with Air Berlin.	1
Salzburg to Berlin and Berlin to Dusseldorf and extremely impressed. I paid very cheap rates for European flights (only about 90 euros per person) but got very good treatment - from newspapers and magazines to a nice snack and drinks. Seats comfortable. I couldn't get over the fact that this was supposed to be a low cost airline.	1
Short flight from Istanbul Ataturk to Athens. Checked in via kiosk and had only carry on baggage. Very smooth process. Boarded a little late and took off late as is with most flights leaving from Ataturk Airport. On board service was very good. Meal was very acceptable. Aircraft was very clean too. It was a pleasure to fly with Aegean and I highly recommend them.	1
Early morning flight to Crete from Athens International. Boarding process was quick and friendly, crew were really good especially considering the time of day of the flight. Flight was quick and offloading process was really quick and easy. Had to deal with Aegean call centre to make changes to an existing booking in order to take this flight. I have to say they were the most helpful and friendly call centre I have ever dealt with. They made changes to my booking and re-routed my flights to accommodate my holiday plans while in Greece. They explained the charges and refunds very clearly and resolved the matter quickly. What a wonderful airline to deal with.	1
Easy check in, lounge access and boarding experience although announcements were difficult to hear from the lounge at Heraklion Airport. Inflight service was great. Crew were friendly and helpful including pilots with their announcements. Cannot fault this airline. They are simple and easy to deal with and provide a great service on super clean aircraft.	1
Despite the strike of Air traffic controllers I was informed of the changing schedule and they changed my ticket to a more convenient time and day. SKG to ATH was short and on time. ATH to LHR was ready to depart 5 min ahead schedule but it was a bit delayed due to air traffic congestion; the same applied over LHR. At all points the pilot informed us promptly. New aircraft, polite crews and  a comfortable business lounge in Athens (though with no spectacular view). 	1
I just returned from a tradeshow in the Ukraine. Aeroflot offered the best fare and connections from Nice (via Moscow) so I took a chance - begrudgingly. Brand-new airbus aircraft smiling cabin crew leather seats and plenty of legroom. The crew came and greeted me to thank me for flying them - a nice touch. The food was good - even in Economy. Shrimp smoked salmon a lovely cod dish - very unexpected.	1
Flight to Larnaca was a joy. Generous legroom, nice meals and a fantastic range of drinks to choose from. Crew was attentive and it is nice that Aegean leave the cockpit door open during boarding..	1
STN-SZG and MUC-HAJ-STN. Excellent for economy tickets and better than competitors. When the first leg of our return flight was delayed (which would mean we would have missed our connection) we were booked onto a BA direct flight to Heathrow without even having to ask. Will use again in preference to RyanAir EasyJet etc	1
Vienna to Bangkok via Beijing. My flight into Beijing from Vienna was delayed due to weather, so I missed my 8.15 connection to Bangkok. I had another flight out from Bangkok at 17.30 that day with a different airline, and there was no room on the next flight to Bangkok 4 hours later. The International dept went out of their way taking time to find me a different Air China flight direct to my ultimate destination, so I didn't have to spend more nights not sleeping in an airport. I was so relieved and grateful for their diligence. The food was good, I had the best seitan, chinese mushroom and bamboo shoot stew I have had and arrived that evening at my Thai destination in fine form. Just goes to show, never mind how much one has paid, a passenger is a passenger and deserves to be well-treated.	1
2 flights - HER to ATH (short 50 minutes) and ATH to MXP. Both went well and flights were on time. Unexpected snacks and drinks on flight. Breakfast on MXP flight. Fast check-in, friendly cabin staff and quick baggage claim.	1
Managed to get my rather large luggage quickly. First flight was on time, the A321 was clean and the Flight hosts were pleasant and friendly. Hot food was served and had an overall pleasant flight. Seats were comfortable enough, they seemed to be the same as the one Lufthansa originally put on their planes and I guess everyone went with them. Arriving in Athens there was a delay of half an hour due to congested skies as its the summer peak time. Boarded on time again a friendly staff with a good plane. They are a great choice.	1
I recently flew to Mykonos through Athens and must say it was a very pleasant experience. The Zurich - Athens - Zurich legs were in Business class, to which I was upgraded for free being a Gold Member of their program Miles and Bonus. During the inbound flight I was served a 4 course menu, with 2 choices for the main course, with excellent wines, return flight was in the morning, so breakfast with 2 choices of eggs (scrambled and omelette), fresh fruit platter, greek yoghourt and bread. Responsible for the Business class section was every time the Maitre de cabine, who was very attentive and kind. Flights were on time (ish) and transfer in Athens was easy and smooth, even though inbound luggage could not be through-checked because of the lack of customs in Mykonos Airport (it was on return though). Only slight downside was check-in at Mykonos at 6 am, with only 2 counters open and queue moving very slowly, taking me 20 minutes to check-in my suitcase. But I guess that's more a matter of the airport than the airline.	1
Dusseldorf-Miami. I was faced in July with few available seats and high fares using American Airlines and other airlines. However travelling Gatwick to Dusseldork and including an overnight stay my trip to Miami with Air Berlin saved me a fortune and I was very impressed with the Air Berlin service. Two reasonable meals as good as other transatlantic economy offerings with free complimentary wine and liqueuers which is something unheard of with AA. IFE via a shared screen but not a problem. The cabin crew were great. Security checks at Dusseldorf quick. All in all a very pleasant trip and with the bonus of an arrival at Miami 35 minutes early.	1
I flew Moscow SVO to Helsinki with Aeroflot I'm very happy with the service very helpful staff. Spacious Economy Class and a very good value for more than an hour flight. No delays on time.	1
Moscow-Volgograd round trip on new and clean 737 & Airbus 330 planes. Check-in and inflight service was excellent in spite of our very limited Russian skills. Good inflight meals at no charge. We had switched our overseas flight from Aeroflot to Delta because of poor Aeroflot reviews (should not have done that). The return Moscow-JFK Delta flight was 3 hrs late causing many on the plane to miss connections at JFK while two Aeroflot planes left on time and made their connections. SVO terminal was beautifully clean modern and bilingual with efficient service in stark contrast to the poor arrival image given by JFK.	1
We flew Heathrow-Athens return and Athens-Santorini. The entire experience was very good. We were a bit delayed on our return flight to Heathrow and were continually updated on progress. The seats were comfortable and not tight. A hot meal was served in flight - no fee and a beverage was even included. This was on a three hour flight - a really nice touch. Unfortunately, my gluten free meal which had been ordered was not on board but the flight attendant provided a very nice salad and a sincere apology. All in all, we had a very enjoyable flight each time.	1
Recently flew from BOS to SNN rountrip economy class. Excellent flight with fantastic cabin attendants, always ready to be of help. Throughout the flight the attendants constantly moved up and down the aisle checking on their passengers. Food was very good and seats quite comfortable. I'm not a great fan of the Boeing 757, but the configuration used by Aer Lingus was very spacious. Aer Lingus is always my first choice when crossing the Atlantic.	1
Gatwick to Chicago via Dublin. As a regular flier to Chicago from London, Aer Lingus is a great option. Short flight to Dublin was fine. Easy connection and pre-clearance at Dublin. A330 has very comfortable lie flat seats in 1-2-1 configuration. Lots of personal space and cabin less crowded than the equivalent BA club product. IFE very good, but movie choice a bit limited. Cabin crew very friendly, attentive and provided excellent service. Food and wine excellent. Difficult to fault and the fares are generally much cheaper than BA. And in flight wifi too, enabling me to post this review from somewhere over Canada! Aer Lingus and its Dublin hub deserve to succeed. Great way to travel to the US.	1
Zürich-Düsseldorf-Reykjavik. Excellent airline friendly staff reasonable food. Good aircraft. Return trip on SAS via Oslo was less enjoyable.	1
I use Aeroflot pretty often on my flights from Los Angeles to Moscow and domestic flights to Russian Far East. Food is great new A330-200 entertainment systems are very good with a big choice of movies. I am loyal to SkyTeam and was forced to used Delta a few times on my journeys to Russian. I realize that Aeroflot staff do not smile always but other things compensate for it. I'd rather not be hungry and bored with okay staff then be hungry and bored onboard of Delta planes.	1
Multiple trip with AE between SKG-FRA and MUC. Aircraft's were always clean service was fine food above average and quite good compared to other regular European airlines and the staff was always courteous and friendly. There were only couple times out of the last maybe 30 round trips the flight was delayed and that happened summertime when the European skies are congested. I have great respect for this airline and how nicely developed to become one of the best regional airlines of Europe.	1
Athens to Corfu on Olympic Air Bombardier Dash400-8 series aircraft (A3 402). Corfu to Athens on Aegean Airbus A320 aircraft (A3 405). Excellent service very clean cabin flights on time and smiling staff.	1
Traveled on 27 May from Zurich to Larnaca on business class. Check-in (mobile) fast and uncomplicated. Airline flew on time crew was very friendly and caring food and beverages were excellent. Information provided from crew was clear and continuous. Overall a very pleasant experience.	1
Athens-Prague on 11 May. Online check-in was quick just had to get boarding passes and to drop off bags at the airport. Despite having a bus gate boarding was organised very well and the flight departed ahead of schedule. The seats were quite comfortable and legroom was acceptable for this short flight. There was a small hot meal of pasta on the flight as well as a small dessert and drinks. Sweets were distributed before the main meal service. The red wine served on board was very good. Of note are the cabin crew who were very friendly and went around their work with smiles on their faces - this is rare these days with most airlines. The entertainment consisted of short videos on Greek island destinations and was ok though there was no audio available. Arrival into Prague on time and bags were processed within 15 minutes after leaving the aircraft. All in all Aegean is a hidden gem of an airline - I had a very good experience with Aegean and I would be glad to fly them again when I can.	1
Chicago to Dublin with Aer Lingus in Business class. Excellent service from attentive cabin crew, food and beverages were excellent. The new business class seats are great and recline flat so a decent sleep can be had. Wifi worked and at a decent speed throughout flight. Only criticism is the number of movies and TV shows available on IFE. Choice seemed limited	1
Boston to Cancun with Aeromexico was my first time flying this airline. Loved the staff and the service was great. They gave us free food included and drink, even a Corona beer and a tequila shot for free. Also had a seatback TV and watched movies. I highly recommend this airline, and I can't wait to visit Mexico again	1
Traveled on February 20th from Athens to Larnaca on Flight A3-908. I must say that the professionalism of the cabin crew was excellent. Although the flight was very short the cabin crew were smiling warm hearted to everyone and even at a time when they had to deal with a passenger that was demanding for more and more alcohol the cabin crew dealt with it with professionalism defusing the situation without embarrassing the passenger. I would definitely choose Aegean again for my trips.	1
Athens to Moscow Sheremyetevo return. New A320 polite staff good food. Price was cheap. I would fly again with Aeroflot.	1
I recently flew from Boston to Dublin alone with my 6 month old daughter. I have to highly praise the cabin crew on both flights, they were terrific and really helped me out with my very active non sleeping 6 month old. I am Irish and travel home a lot to see family and friends and after the wonderful experience I will not be nervous to travel alone with my daughter again. I've already booked my flights home for Christmas and wouldn't dream of travelling with anybody but Aer Lingus. Thank you so much.	1
Dublin to Munich return with Aer Lingus. Full flights, good onboard service, friendly crew and informative pilots. Staff were efficient and chatty. Flights on time. Highly recommended.	1
This was our first trip post Covid to Germany and as it was high season, we wanted to be comfortable so we booked J-Class for our trip to and from FRA via YYZ from YOW. Our check in at YOW was seamless as well as being very professional. The Maple Leaf Lounge was well staffed, spotlessly cleaned with very fresh tasty food and drink to enjoy. Boarding was very easy via Zone-1 and we were able to get our carry on into the overhead lockers (Full flight as well) on the new Airbus-220 in which we found clean and well appointed. Service as expected on a short inter city flight was well done by very polite professional crew. On an arrival in YYZ we transited to the Air Canada Signature Lounge where we enjoyed a small hot meal with appetizer with appropriate wine and champagne. Boarding in YYZ for FRA was seamless using Zone-1 and flight left late due to the number of passengers (full flight). On board service, food and drink selection was excellent due to the type of overseas flight. On arrival in FRA, we start at the B-Concourse with a 20-minute walk through immigration to the baggage hall where our baggage (4 pieces) was coming off the belt. On our return we changed a later flight to an earlier domestic connection easily thanks to the FRA staff. The MLL in FRA was excellent well appointed with food, drink with helpful staff. Even took advantage of having a shower before departure which was very nice. The FRA YYZ flight was exceptional service as well great food and drink. Even the Captain entered the first J Cabin to talk to passengers which was a nice touch. On arrival in YYZ no issues with customs or immigration with thanks to the Arrive Canada Ap and NEXUS. Our last flight was delayed due to a weather issue from the aircraft leaving DEN for YYZ. The CCSA kept everyone informed on delays as well as my email and Ap messaging service. On arrival in YOW our baggage arrived so no issues with this flight. In conclusion Air Canada handled itself brilliantly and the number of emails as well as text messages were very reassuring that they were doing their best to keep us informed at all times.	1
We were traveling from Fort Lauderdale to Montreal. During check in Zaira noticed that we won’t have enough time to get to our connecting flight (thank god she noticed). She then proceeded to help us get to our final destination Italy (which is where she is from). She rebooked our flight and got us a travel voucher to go to MIA. She even went above and beyond by helping us check in and get our luggage paid. Amazing service from an amazing person. She deserves a raise.	1
I had an excellent experience with Aeromexico. They took care of my dietary concerns and I was aware of the baggage policy when traveling to and from South America. Agents met me with instructions concerning my bags in both directions. 	1
Excellent Aeromexico flight from Mexico to Buenos Aires, and punctual. Outstanding service onboard, carefully prepared food which is excellent quality and quantity.	1
Flew London to Athens and then on to Ioannina and then from Ioannina to Athens and back to London. Great flight new and comfortable planes professional crew good meals and snacks. Great airline with great product. When and if I ever go to Greece again I will fly with Aegean.	1
I flew on October 5th then on to Mykonos. I then flew to Athens and then to Kos. On the 16th from Kalymnos to Athens and back to Mykonos and then on 22nd Mykonos - Athens - to Irakio Crete and then from Crete back to Athens. I must say I have had some excellent flights with Aegean. All flights on time and an excellent meal from London to Athens and this being Economy. On the internal flights you were offered a soft drink and snack. Cabin crews were extremely professional and I look forward to next October. The only downside is that: 1) They did not show any films or music available on the London flight and 2) When I booked in March I could not book the November flight home because tickets were not available so BA flew me home. I knocked a point off their food and beverages as they don't serve a gin and tonic in Economy. AS I have said I look forward to flying with them next year but they have changed the flight times to Mykonos from Athens from 7 pm to 6.30 pm which makes life difficult so they might lose this customer.	1
Orlando to Halifax via Montreal. We used another airline to fly from Florida to Halifax. But our Air Canada experience from Halifax, to Montreal, and then to Orlando, was handled really well. As we all know, many airlines are understaffed, flights are cancelled and flyers are left waiting at gates for hours while crew from another flight arrives. It's routine, every time I have flown in the last year. Our departing flight from Halifax was a half hour late. We received a prompt email and were reassured our connection in Montreal would be held for us and 16 other passengers. The counter check in was smooth. The clerk was polite and friendly. She told us the connecting flight would be held to accommodate us and the other passengers. When we arrived at the gate, announcements were made to reassure us that our trip would not be cancelled or further delayed. We boarded the flight when they said we would. Our arrival in Montreal was also guided. The clerks moved us to Priority security check-in, and then to a counter for entrance to Customs. So apparently, US nationals are put through customs in Montreal before we fly back to our country. That went smooth too. In addition to us, there were about 30 other passengers expedited through this staging area and onto Customs counters. A man directed all of us to the counters and assured us our flights were waiting for us. He was emotionally poised and seemed to know exactly what was going on with the flights. The customs counter woman was also polite. I am impressed with our experience with Air Canada and I will fly them again.	1
This was my third flight with Aegean in the last three years. I had pleasant experiences with my other two but wanted to reconfirm consistency before I rated this airline. Travelled LHR to ATH this time. Plane was clean and comfortable (for a 3 hour or so flight). My compliments to the staff. As in past flights they very pleasant warm and professional. Food served was as good as can be expected.	1
We had an amazing flight with Air Canada rouge from Las Vegas to Vancouver on Monday May 9th. The flight crew were truly amazing! Very helpful, friendly and professional. We were amazed when one of them suggested that we might be able to get my 9 year old son to visit the cockpit after the flight landed. It was an amazing experience, and the gave us an amazing experience that none of us will ever forget! It's been a while since we experienced such great customer service and we appreciate it!	1
Was anxious about what kind of service we were going to receive for our Aeromexico flight from Mexico City to Puerto Vallarta as part of our holiday, having read many poor reviews mainly from American travellers. The service was great, our check in was very straight forward, helpful staff, timely boarding, clean (new) Boeing 737-800 with very comfortable seats good entertainment system and USB charging. Short flight so refreshments service was all that was needed. Baggage was out on the belt in no time at all. Well done Aeromexico.	1
Rome to Athens June 23 2014. Flight was on-time comfortable seat spacing nice meal friendly and attentive staff. Would fly them again.	1
Travelled with Aegean Airlines from Barcelona to Athens. Flight was delayed leaving Barcelona however still managed to arrive in Athens on time. Excellent cabin service provided by attentive and polite flight attendants. Can't complain especially with the hot meal and free alcoholic beverage provided in economy class. Wish Aegean offered long haul routes to North America!	1
JIK-ATH-LHR on 11 August 2014. Return flight after week in Ikaria. Aegean flight left a few minutes late but made up time although sadly had to stack for 45 minutes at Heathrow. Excellent legroom and seat comfort. Pleasantly surprised with the quality of the meal provided and the drinks so much more than so-called cheaper airlines. Would definitely fly Aegean again. Only downside was the failure of UK Border Agency to have sufficient staff at the immigration desks at Terminal 2.	1
Domestic flights: Athens-Kerkira (Corfu) on a A319 aircraft and Ioannina-Athens on a Bombardier DHC-8-400Q (operated by Olympic Air). Excellent service on-time performance and very polite staff.	1
JMK-ATH-LHR. A3 377/A3 608 7 Aug 2014. Mykonos - Athens sector operated by Olympic Air Dash 800 aircraft. Clean inside and out and welcomed on board by very polite cabin crew. Only 2 Flight Attendants for a 20 minute flight. Departed on time and despite the fact that it was such a short flight a full drink service was offered with a variety of soft drinks napkins ice and a bag of peanuts and everyone was served. Upon landing in ATH the goodbye and thanks you greeting was polite with a smile. An excellent flight. 3 hour layover at Eleftherios Venizelos International Airport Athens was a breeze. Was given an invite to the Aegean Business Lounge on the A side of the departure terminal which was comfortable with the usual drinks and snacks available and regularly topped up. Nice clean lounge with a view of both runways. ATH-LHR Aegean Business. Departed ATH with 15 minute delay clean Airbus A321-200 aircraft. Good PA announcements by Purser and Captain. Comfortable leather seats with middle seat free. Drink service and peanuts after take off with hot towel service. Menu was provided with a choice of 2 hot main meals of chicken or swordfish with a delicious salmon entree and a selection of delicious Greek desserts. A good choice of wines including award winning Greek varieties plus the usual soft after dinner and a good selection of teas and coffees. Hot towel service again before landing. Landed on time. A very impressive service offered by Aegean. Have no hesitation about using them again.	1
I'm writing to say thank you to Aer Lingus for looking after me on a recent trip. On 21st July, I had a 6:20pm flight booked with Aer Lingus from Dublin to Birmingham. Unfortunately, I arrived at the airport late and, to make matters worse, I misplaced my carry-on luggage in the duty-free shop, which meant I couldn't make my flight. Not only did the helpful ground staff reassure me and find my case for me, a manager provided a seat on the next flight free of charge. This is the kind of service that goes above : a sympathetic and generous solution to what could have been a very stressful situation. My sincere thanks to everyone at Aer Lingus.	1
On my Aer Lingus flight to Chicago I became ill, suffering from motion sickness. The crew on board are so helpful and sweet to me. During the flight, they were constantly checking on me and moved me up to the business class so I can recover. I wanted to thank the Aer Lingus staff from that day! 	1
Flew from Rome FCO to ATH 2 hour flight but had a large selection of drinks lovely meal then tea or coffee after dinner. The staff were charming and helpful no delays at all the check in staff were informative and efficient telling us where to go with our rucksacks (apparently they're awkward shape so go in the 'oversized baggage' section). We were so efficient getting off the plane we beat our luggage to the conveyor belt. Would definitely recommend this airline to anyone.	1
Full flight, left and arrived on time. Did not purchase any refreshments on this short journey.	1
My wife and I flew AeroMexico for the first time this past June. We didn't know what to expect but were extremely pleased. The planes we flew to and from Cancun were new and clean. Screens at every seat. Great service from staff. kicker is that I somehow managed to lose my iPhone on the way back home. I thought it must have been at the Cancun Airport so I called them a few times to check the lost and found. Nothing. Then about three days after my flight I got a call from AeroMexico that they had discovered my phone on the plane. I hadn't even informed them that it was missing because I checked my seat area and was fairly sure that it wasn't there. Honestly I don't even know how they managed to figure out whose phone it was. They may have had to call multiple people in our area of the plane. Anyway I went back to the airport and remarkably, they had my phone. I was relieved and extremely impressed. Needless to say I would highly recommend this airline to anyone flying to/from Mexico. And they are linked to Delta so I believe your points will accrue as Skymiles. 	1
Check-in was fast. Our plane was  comfortable. Each traveler had access to a touchscreen tv. We were able watch movies, tv shows, music videos and listen to music. They also provided croissant sandwich along with snacks and drinks. We arrived on time and without any problems. Thank you Aeromexico for your excellent service.	1
After flying Ryanair for the past 7 years, I found a cheap fare for Aer Lingus, I didn't hesitate to book the flag-carrier for my return leg. Boarding was a shambles to be blunt about it, like cows walking into a barn, just banging into each other and no order of a queue. This was due to handling agents at Venice and not EI crew. The departure was speedy and comfortable, the crew were very smily and friendly upon boarding. The captain have numerous updates throughout the flight about delays and our ETA. Meal service was excellent. Although slow, this didn't matter on the 3 hour flight. The food was so fresh. I could tell the scone was baked recently and the bread on my sandwich was so soft. The best inflight food I've head in a while to be honest. Although it's not free, it is reasonably priced. The approach was very quick and we landed 10 minutes ahead of schedule after departing 20 minutes late which was nice. De boarding was nice and a big farewell from the smiley crew. A very enjoyable flight.	1
Toronto to Varadero, Cuba return with Air Canada rouge. This was our first premium class flight anywhere. Our hostess on flight #1986 on January 24th was rather crusty, but this wasn't going to ruin our experience. The food was excellent, the seats were so comfortable, and it was very quiet in our area. We were given tablets to enjoy movies. On the flight home, #1987 on February 7th, our airline host addressed us by name with a smile and was efficient and friendly. We had the best meal we've ever had on an airplane (chicken with rice and a sauce that was to die for, an arugula and kale salad and a brownie, plus excellent wine), on china with cutlery and a linen napkin. We had warm cashews with a beverage to begin with, and snacks to follow lunch. The cost of this flight was well worth the money. We are so spoiled now that we don't want to go back to economy ever! 	1
I was more worried about the baggage fees than the airline, come to find out that Aeromexico allows 1 carry on and first checked bag for free up to 50 pounds. The plane that we took from Dallas to Mexico City was a nice plane, 2 seater instead of 3, they served us a Ham and Cheese croissant, peanuts, juice, water, beer, liqour, whatever we wanted. Smooth ride, nice landing, made it to Mexico City, from there we took a bigger plane but a little bit older, still a smooth ride and landing. On the way back from Cancun we were in a very nice plane with our own TV, headphones, several movies to choose from. My experience flying with Aeromexico was really good, nothing to complain about.	1
LHR-ATH leg on Aegean Airlines Flight A3601 Economy. Check in with Aegean was a breeze professional and quick. Boarding was efficient and welcomed on board by polite and attentive crew with genuine smiles. Nice to see New Airbus A321 clean outside and spotless interior. Lunch consisted of tasty Greek meatballs with potatoes which was delicious. Greek salad as starter and a nice dessert. Tea and a choice of coffees were available and the usual soft drinks. Cabin crew were very polite and pleasant helpful and offered service with a smile. A Singapore Airlines style service. Return leg ATH-LHR was just as pleasant. Found the whole Aegean experience to be very comfortable with polite attentive crew and good service throughout. Would have no hesitation in using them again.	1
I flew from Geneva to Athens in May 2014. Crew were very polite and welcoming the service was excellent for the price. I was surprised to have a full meal and to receive an alcoholic drink for free for such a low ticket price. I flew back with a low cost airline from Thessaloniki…the ticket was more expensive and of course nothing was offered to eat or drink. I was also surprised to see how fast and easy it is to upgrade in their miles and bonus program. I have already booked my next flight with them.	1
Athens - Brussels - Athens. Nice service friendly staff clean and comfortable seats. Good food on time.	1
I've not had the chance to fly Air Canada for a few years and I am pleased to say the experience was just as good as before with only one letdown. My checked bag did not make it onto the plane! It was however returned to me two days later in Duluth, USA. The flight left on time and arrived on time, both of which are a big plus these days. The seat was very comfortable, the food and service were great and the IFE was good enough.	1
Flight 9100 and 9101 coach seating 4/3 to 4/7/15. I cannot say enough good things about or flight service through Aeromexico. The planes were clean and very comfortable loved having the option of watching a movie TV show or listening to music. The attendants were friendly and took care of us all very well. Lunch boxes were served - that's a pleasant surprise in itself! I was very impressed!	1
Flew from LHR thru MEX to PVR. Was my first time on the Dreamliner. It's a beautiful aircraft and the AeroMexico service and comfort the best I've experienced in long-haul tourist class. Formalities and connection at MEX Term 2 very efficient. Domestic flight to PVR on very comfortable Embraer 190.	1
LHR-ATH-RHO return. First time with Aegean. Extremely pleasant and professional staff excellent planes and comfortable seating. Not cheap but excellent airline.	1
A321 and A320 Kos - Athens / Athens - Vienna May 3 2014. Nice service friendly staff clean and comfortable seats. Simple and useful online check-in.	1
First flight with Aegean Airlines and found it all very relaxing. The staff were friendly and helpful and tried to give the personal touch. From the moment we checked our bags in we found them to be really helpful. I was very nervous about the stay over and catching the next flight from ATH to RHO but they really reassured me and made sure I felt happy. On arrival in ATH they made the change of flight very stress free. Definitely use them again. So much different to Ryanair who were dreadful.	1
Was delayed in Dublin, flight cancelled to Jersey in the end, but put in marvellous hotel, provided 3 course meal and prompt transport back to airport in the morning. Greatful thanks to Aer Lingus and taxi service they provided.	1
Have to give a extra shout out to the Air Canada rouge flight attendants on our adventure with 10 other friends! We were on flight 1774 on January 31st from Toronto to Samaná, Dominican Republic. The attendants were amazing and so friendly, and just kept smiling!They deserve big hugs and pats on the back! Our whole experience was just wonderful for such a large gang! From start to finish very impressive even when a computer clinch happened! Keep up the good work.	1
AM 681. Flew YUL-MEX on a new 737-800 for the second time. Cabin was in great condition. Food service on this flight was much better than on my previous flights with Aeromexico in Clase Premier. Cabin crew were excellent and very professional. The purser knew each of the business class passenger's last names (there were 16 of us) and she was always around to see if she was needed. I fell asleep and she left me a drink and peanuts for when I woke up. Aeromexico staff is usually just OK - they are efficient but are cold and tend to disappear into the galley afterwards. This was not the case in this flight when there was always a flight attendant in the cabin (even in economy class). Great flight overall wish all crews performed this way.	1
I have been using Aeromexico for several years for business travel from Chicago to various locations throughout Mexico. They have multiple direct flights. I have been happy with their service both at the counter at the gate and on the airplane. The planes seem to be maintained well and bathrooms and seating areas are clean. Service is pleasant and professional without trying to be cute during announcements. The food to me just seems to be a little better the service a bit more professional and the areas cleaner than everyone else. Again much of what one views is based on perceptions and a few negative things can color one's view. In my case I see so many small positive things that it has probably colored my view of Aeromexico in a good way.	1
AM 423 Nov 27 2014. AM 422 Dec 2 2014. I have flown from Miami to Mexico and back many times. For several years I made the trip once a month. I have flown on every airline that services Mexico City from Miami. AeroMexico beats them all. Basic friendliness refreshments and snacks prompt departures and arrivals reasonable and competitive fares all without the ubiquitous add-ones and charges of other airlines. I will adjust my schedule to fly this airline every time. This trip was the first in several years and it didn't disappoint. Keep it up I'm a big fan.	1
JFK to CUN 10/8/14 flight 417. Return flight 416 on 10/16/14. Excellent airline. Starting from check in all associates were friendly and helpful. Personal entertainment in the seat backs was perfect. 1st checked bag free is always appreciated. Food was great and also a bonus as it was served at no charge and with smiling associates. Aeromexico is a new favorite airline of mine.	1
I was booked on an evening flight from Santorini to Athens but arrived very late and after closure of the check-in desk. I expected the worst that is to be refused boarding but I was so impressed that the Aegean staff agreed to check me in opened the check-in desk and helped me to join the other boarding passengers very efficiently. Full marks for flexibility without compromising security or delaying the flight and that extra effort made such a difference and saved me from a nightmarish situation of cancelled onward flights and hotel. The flight itself was also very stress-free and the hostesses were polite and friendly. Very nice airline.	1
ATH-MUC in economy in March 2014 economy has the dreaded "slimline" seats that LH started and everyone seems to be following. That said flight crew was pleasant and professional airplane was clean flight landed on time- Aegean even gives you a snack and a drink on this flights. Pleasant experience would recommend.	1
I had a very pleasant experience flying with Aer Lingus. Although the business class is not up to par with most other airlines, it is far from bad and the service was great - Irish hospitality at its best! 	1
I had never flown AeroMexico prior to my first visit to Mexico in October/November 2014. I was impressed that they have a new modern fleet comprising 777s and the 787 Dreamliner. The check in process at the counters in Mexico City was very expedient and friendly. The boarding and departure were timeous. The service onboard for the quick domestic flight to Oaxaca was super friendly and cheerful. I cannot fault this airline. It was a better experience than most domestic airlines I fly in Australia.	1
I really think this airline is sadly overlooked in the US market. I took a chance on them a few years back when United dropped direct flights to places in Mexico I visit and found an airline with great service modern planes and competitive prices. The flight schedules are convenient and the staff I have encountered have been friendly and helpful when I have needed them. Only once have I had a issue due to weather - and they made sure to get me on another flight and while my bags did not make it on the plane they had them secured and waiting for me the next morning. In the past 3 years I have flown with them 10+ times and have no interest in looking elsewhere.	1
Flights from San Antonio to Cuernavaca then back to Atlanta were most pleasant experiences. All the things I like to have happen when flying came together on both flights. Both were on time check in went quickly and smoothly every Aeromexico person I had contact with was professional and friendly and even boarding was quick and efficient. The meals - sandwich and candy bar - was well a sandwich but the bread was fresh and a fun sized Snickers isn't all that bad. This was my second and third flight with Aeromexico and all were very pleasant flights. I caught up on a TV show going down and a movie coming back home. For me the airline did a great job and the fare was very reasonable.	1
Excellent friendly service. Able to fly in and out of Cardiff when other flights were cancelled due to fog. Maybe more expensive than alternatives, but reliable. Preferred airline on the Cardiff-Dublin route.	1
Flight 24. Departed at 11.55pm on Oct 20 and arrived at 12.30pm on Oct 21. Had a very positive experience with my flights to and from Mexico City to Rio de Janeiro in Premiere Class. From the gate agents to the inflight crew the service was excellent. The meals and entertainment was also very good.	1
I had two flights with them in business class MEX-MAD and LHR-MEX. The Madrid flight was in a 777 and the London - Mexico flight was in a new 787. Completely different experience. They have substantially improved their food offering but now the crews have an excellent attitude in the way they treat the clients. The seat in the 777 is outdated as is the entertainment system but the 787 flat bed seat is a great quality seat. I can never sleep on planes and when I went up to the galley for a snack I found the cabin crew to be very friendly.	1
First time flying with Aegean Airlines from FRA to ATH on a Lufthansa codeshare and couldn't be happier. Nice to have inflight infotainment on a short haul flight and not bad food better than Air Canada. No delays on time and cabin crew were nice. Only downside was that there was no seat-back monitors which many airliners are upgrading to and seats are sort of stiff.	1
ATH-ROM-ATH. Great airline with great service and great staff. The trip was perfect despite the bad weather.	1
I have now been flying with Aegean since they took over the Olympic slots at Heathrow. This year on the morning of October 7th Heathrow was fog bound so the flight to Athens was delayed by two hours. This meant missing the evening flight to Mykonos. As soon as I was checking in their staff were most helpful. On arriving at Athens I was put up in Hotel Sofitel everything paid for and caught the flight to Mykonos the following morning. My only thought is that the evening flight to Mykonos is too tight with the London flight around about an hour and needs looking in to. Aegean is an excellent airline as part of my holiday flew with them to Crete as well all flights were full and I look forward to flying with them next October.	1
On a return journey to Dublin from Lanzarote (flight 779) I had fallen unwell 15 minutes post takeoff. The urge to throw-up a feeling not welcomed by most especially not at 30000+ altitude was overwhelming and a sense of unwanted panic set in. Luckily I was accompanied by my boyfriend whom along with the diligent and empathetic flight crew got me back on track for the remainder of the flight. Frequently asking if I was ok or whether I needed anything was a small but oh so grand gesture which made such a positive difference.	1
April 15th flight 108 return 26th Apr flight 105. My mother and I flew from JFK to Dublin and return. We were in economy from JFK to DUB and in Premier class on the return trip. Both were great experiences and on Aer Lingus new A330. The food was excellent in both cabins. We opted for the succulent steal ($18) in Economy and it was delicious. Crew were lovely. On return we were in the new Premier class cabin. The crew the food the service was terrific. You really could not ask for more.	1
Was extremely pleased with the level of friendly professional service we received on two flight segments from Cincinnati OH to Cancun Mexico a few weeks ago. The stewardesses on every one of the four flights were so helpful and willing to please that I was taken back due to the fact that of late stewardesses in general have carried an air of arrogant indifference. The planes were very clean. The schedule was adhered to.	1
My wife and I flew from Rome to Athens and Athens to Paris recently check in was a breeze and both flights were great. No problems at all.	1
We flew from Ireland with our 9 month old baby and I was 29 weeks pregnant the staff were great we had flown to Ireland with a different carrier but because of the lack of facilities for our little one we decided to let our return trip expire and book new flights with Aer Lingus there is nothing bad I can say about this airline they make you feel comfortable and were so good with our little one we were even given a bassinet for him to sleep in. I highly recommend to anyone with small children.	1
Fort Lauderdale to Toronto, and excellent service through Air Canada rouge. Commendation sent to the airline for the pleasant and professional service received by the Flight Attendants on this flight. Thank you to everyone that provided an excellent journey. I will continue to use and endorse Air Canada rouge.	1
Such a great Airline. I am flying Air Canada every other week for work, today, I brought along my wife and daughter, Montreal Airport customs was so long we would miss our flight. I figured I would try to make it to the gate by myself using Nexus and ask to hold the flight for a few minutes. I did, my wife and daughter arrived at the gate 10 minutes later than the flight time but we still made it. Thank you so much Alex from the ground crew who helped us so much and happy birthday! 51 flights and counting this year with Air Canada, this kind of attention keep your clients loyal.	1
AM633 on 21 August SAT-MEX and AM632 on August 25 MEX-SAT. Short trip from SAT to MEX and return on Embraer jet. First time on AM and it was a terrific experience crew were efficient aircraft clean and very well maintained. Snack service was tasty with fresh choices and excellent bar service. I will gladly take AM again as my travel plans permit.	1
We fly Aeromexico JFK to Cancun. We use them whenever we can. The reasons are many but here are some. The crew are very accommodating and always courteous. We enjoy having food to eat. If there is an empty seat after takeoff we were allowed to move. The plane was new.	1
Been flying AM 429 Monday morning flight for about 3 months now and returning on Thursdays flight 422. Very friendly and professional service airplanes are modern and with more leg room than most.	1
We flew from Athens to Rhodes 2 weeks ago fantastic airline short flight had sweets and soft drinks plenty of leg room.	1
I fly LGW-DUB-LGW every fortnight. The crew are always extremely friendly considering it is 06.50am and 20.50 on the return. The service is great and they always smile & welcome everyone on board unlike the other Irish airline. However one major concern from the end of March '15 the 06.50 flight will cease to operate and the first flight of the day to Dublin will be at 09.10 which is useless for those of us going to work in Dublin.	1
My husband and I flew to Mexico City and then to Manzanillo. Staff were friendly and helpful. We encountered no problems with this airline. Our flights ran on schedule and our luggage was not lost. On the return trip I was missing a form at the time of boarding staff quickly helped me fill it out and held the plane for me to run back to the boarding gate. We will use this airline again. We feel like we received good service for the price of our ticket.	1
BRU-ATH ATH-BRU. Jul 20 2013 and Aug 11 2013. Aegean always exceeds expectations. Attentive and courteous cabin crew clean aircraft and comfortable seats. Above and beyond!	1
RHO-ATH-FCO. This should be listed as a 4-star airline. Clean new planes excellent meals featuring Greek items and the most courteous FA's I have encountered in years. A pleasure to fly!	1
Athens to London Heathrow with A321. Very clean aircraft very helpful crew and tasty food. Very nice take off and landing.	1
DUB-JFK - December 2014. Third time flying Business with EI most flights are economy and this was a treat for our wedding anniversary. From Dublin - check in efficient lounge pleasant US immigration took minutes. Boarded first and welcomed with a glass of champagne. Crew chatty and attentive. Lovely meal and a few hours sleep on the near flat beds. I understand this year they will move to fully flat. Arrive in JFK as a domestic passenger so seamless to public transport or a cab. Flying back was excellent too. Slept most of the flight. Crew in good spirits but not as good as the crew out on the 17th (4pm flight). Overall top marks.	1
Newark to Singapore via Beijing with Air China. The planes were fairly new, clean and everything worked. The cabin staff spoke English and were there to serve us. They were extremely helpful and friendly. The food was plentiful and very good. The movies, in both English and Chinese, were current not outdated as some have noted. My only comment is the business class lay-flat seats on the A330 was more comfortable than the seats on the Boeing 777ER. The screens were larger also. We took advantage of the 72-hour transit visa in Beijing and had a wonderful time. Planning to return again in the future. The re-boarding in Beijing for our flight to Singapore was very easy because they have a check-in area for first and business class passengers. We took advantage of the Business Class lounge which had plentiful food and drinks. The return trip from Singapore via Beijing to Newark was even better. Check-in at the Singapore airport is in the first/business class lounge. Transit in Beijing was quick and allowed us to enjoy the Business class lounge again. We were hoping to get the same cabin crew for our trip to Newark but the new crew was just as hospitable and friendly and spoke English. We will surely fly Air China again, and the cost is much less than other airlines flying the same route. 	1
MEX-PVR-MEX-CUN on EMB190 B737-700 and B737-800. EMB190 and B737-800 were new and great B737-700 was old but well kept. First row on economy is great with plenty of leg room. All flights were on time and service was good. They offer only refreshments and alcoholic drinks. Attendants were nice and speak English perfectly. Terminal 2 at MEX is modern and great. Luggage drop and security was very fast. On B737-700 and -800 there was full IFE service with more than 10 movies.	1
JFK-MEX-ZIH and return. JFK-MEX on the red eye was completed on an older model 737 with no inflight entertainment (presumably due to the timing of the flight - depart 12.15am arrive 4.40am) but we were served a very nice hot sandwich shortly after takeoff. MEX-JFK return on a brand-new 737 - great plane excellent inflight entertainment and again a nice hot meal. The ZIH-MEX connection was slightly delayed but we were assured that a significant amount of passengers on the flight were connecting to the JFK flight. Sure enough about 18 of us were greeted by an agent upon deplaning in MEX and were escorted as a group to the JFK gate which was in the process of boarding. Excellent service throughout by both ground and cabin crews. Would not hesitate to recommend Aeromexico in the future.	1
Flew London Heathrow to Athens and back. Great cabin crew very friendly. Food is rather good (for airline food)! Beverage service is excellent. Enjoyed the extra legroom and the leather seats.	1
Larnaca - Rhodes return. Both flights on time comfy seats and friendly cabin crew. No inflight entertainment probably because it was a short flight but a good experience to fly with Aegean.	1
