Trying to fly from New York to Toronto for the second day today. Agents are very unhelpful and the airline 24/7 call service is not reachable (they said it doesn’t work). They said that hotels won’t be provided and compensations not rewarded if we purchase somewhere else to stay and the best is just to sleep in the airport. We were provided voucher each for 10$ (it’s worth of 2 water bottles in this airport). We didn’t even get a sorry or something. This trip is a disaster.	0
I have been flying around the world for more than twenty years and Aeromexico is one of the worst airlines I have ever flown. Service was horrible with screens and remote controls falling apart. Quality of food and snacks was deplorable. Connection from Mexico City-Sao Paulo was delayed to the next morning. Aeromexico sent me, my wife and two kids to a downtown hotel far from the airport, with poor quality and extremely noisy neighborhood. We were supposed to arrive in Sao Paulo between 10-11:00 am and we arrived at 10:00 pm. Flight back had no delays but again, horrible food, flight attendants rude and unhelpful. Flying with a family we always try to save the most on our ticket price but for sure, next time I will pay a little more to avoid Aeromexico. Do not make that mistake, I am still regretting it.	0
Done 4 flights on Aeromexico flying from Mexico to San Francisco. Not only were the planes old, the seat was literally coming apart! Headrest, seat bottom all in really bad shape. Boarding is never on time even when it's the first flight. Worse still, they don't always communicate everything in English meaning key statements are missed are not translated but in Spanish.	0
Calgary to Lima via Mexico City. Buyer beware Aeromexico has the worst cancellation policy I have ever come by with an Ariline. My husband and I had to cancel our flights due to a family medical emergency. I went to re-book the tickets 3 weeks later, I was told there would be a $100USD no show fee applied to our rebooking for each ticket plus a $250 re-booking fee for each ticket! A total of $700USD. I had cancelled our prior tickets more than a week before flying. When cancelling my flight the rep didn't notify me of this policy. When booking it said there is a cancellation fee but $350 a ticket is crazy. When calling in to re-book, I asked for a manager and was told there was no manager available and that I would need to send in an email. The response time was going to be 7 - 10 days. I called again the next night to speak with a manager, I was told that there was no one available. I said I would wait, they finally put me through, I waited for 10 minutes and was hung up on. I tried calling back again, waited on the phone for an hour and no-one answered. Pretty sure they screened my call. Needless to say we didn't re-book with them and were unable to use our credit. Very disappointed in the lack of customer service and terrible policies - rip-off!	0
Air Berlin carries its passengers in very low regard. After several plane issues a problem with the door opening and other mechanical problems we sat on the plane at the gate for 30 minutes. While most of the plane had connecting flights the airline did not hold the planes. After flying 11 hours from LAX to Berlin I counted twelve of us that missed the connecting flight to Zurich due to the airline's failures. Had they held the plane it could not have been delayed more than ten minutes. So I had to wait five hours in the Berlin airport for the next flight. The airline's response? A measly $10 voucher not accepted by many businesses in the airport.	0
Columbus to Venice via Toronto, we were booked on our outbound flight with Air Canada rouge. I say unfortunately because the resulting experience with them was just that. In addition to losing my luggage, which I did not receive the entire time while in Italy, the 8+ hour flight was on an old plane with no built-in TV's. They offered iPads which could be rented at a cost, however the in-flight staff never offered these to my wife and I. The food was sub-par, and overall was a very poor experience. Air Canada rouge wants 35 days to review my claim and assess whether or not I will be reimbursed for the $500 USD I had to spend in order to put together a wardrobe to get through the trip. In addition, the team working on the claim is not accessible other than through submission of forms on their website. Obviously they do not wish to interact with customers that they have inconvenienced, I am someone whom never writes reviews, however I felt compelled to do so on this experience as it was that bad.	0
Flew Business Class with my wife from Dubai to Miami via Toronto. Arrived in Miami on 22nd December 2022 but Air Canada had lost both of our bags. We completed a lost bags form and were told we'd be contacted within 24hrs. Problem was that we were going on a cruise to the Caribbean departing on 24th December. On 23rd December the bags were no where in sight so we made the decision to go and buy new clothes. Three days into the cruise we were told by Air Canada that our bags had arrived in Sao Paolo. When we checked in at Miami airport to return to Dubai our bags were given back to us. I have registered a compensation claim as we spent USD 3k on new clothes and luggage but received no response. I will never ever travel with Air Canada again.	0
Besides losing my baggage, I arrived 5 hours late to the final destination. After filling all the reclamation and refund forms (process Air Canada definitively does not make easy if you are not living in Canada or the US), I never got an answer, even after almost 2 months.	0
Bereavement Policy is a scam. First sentence of their bereavement policy is "Our bereavement policy offers reduced fares and the flexibility you need during a difficult time." But when I called customer support after I booked through bereavement policy they said they do not guarantee the lowest rate for bereavement fare. It's disgusting that I have to provide all this info to them (death certificate, info on funeral) and what do I get? An extra bag of peanuts for my troubles? I'm flying to Halifax instead of my actual destination of Charlottetown as it is $1000 round trip vs $1800 and then I look up a rates for round trip to Halifax on my own afterwards and what do you know $900, all the same days.	0
The four of us booked a flight from Vancouver to Bogota, with a 2-hours connecting flight in Mexico City. The flight landed in Mexico City 30 mins late, and we were rushing to get to our connecting flight. We had to go through customs, pick up our luggage, then drop it off again and go through custom and security for our connecting flight, in less than an hour and half. We actually missed our flight, and when we went to the Aeromexico help desk, they said they could do nothing for us, but we had to pay over 800CAD each to take the next flight. It was cheaper for us to book with another airline from Mexico city to Bogota, but apparently, if we do that then our return flight gets cancelled as well. So pretty much, we were forced to pay 800 each, we couldn't take other airline, and we had to pretty much sleep on the airport floor until our next flight left. And they had two flights to Bogota the same day and the flight was pretty much empty! They should've known better that Mexico City had ridiculously slow immigration, yet they scheduled the flight to be only 2 hours apart. Not only that, their flight landed late, and we didn't even have the option of choosing another flight?	0
Edinburgh to Dublin in August. Terrible. I only fly Aerlingus if I have no choice due to work.  Aer Lingus didn't put my suitcase into the hold, along with 20 others due to space issues. Even though I paid £20 for the baggage. They then lied to me several times about the location of my luggage, which contained all my business clothes and medication. Eventually they delivered my suitcase after 4 days, just before I was leaving Dublin to fly home. I was forced to buy new clothes, toiletries etc at expense to myself which I am still waiting for compensation on after nearly 4 months. Aer Lingus ignored my complaints several times now and eventually promised to send me compensation, which then didn't appear - been waiting 6 weeks now for that.	0
JFK to Nice via DUS. Flight was awful. The whole flight was spent with a woman putting her seat back in my lap. Mind you the legroom was barely existent to begin with. The seat back TV had no sound and the one on my wife's side had no picture. The crew while strolling by didn't really react to anything. The food? The "meal" on this flight was inedible! I could barely wait for them to take it away! The only saving grace was the warm beers I could occasionally get from a bored crew member. The second leg was thankfully quick and over fast no food and they wanted money for everything. Sometimes comfort is worth the price.	0
New York to Bangkok via Beijing. Air China cancelled our flight without providing any options. We were on the phone with them and our Travel agents full 3 days (several hours a days of conversations and hours waiting to get to an agent on the phone). They were not able to provide any reasonable options. We had to review all possible flights ourselfs and asked them to reschedule our flight. They were unable to do it over the phone (~20 calls) nor at the airport Air China counter (at JFK and EWR). They were  dragging the time until all our other connecting flights and hotels reservation gone (since we were still staying at the New York waiting for their "decision" for 3 days.) They were pointing to each other (Air China agents and Travel Agents) asking to call airline or travel agent and vice versa. We even had 2 conference call with both AirChina and travel agents during which they were just blaming each other and not resolving the issue. So we could not stand this circus anymore and they offered our last option and only option: to get refund or they will not refund if we will not agree now. Rude, unprofessional agents, don't have any desire to do their work. Avoid Air China at all costs!	0
Orlando to Montreal. Seats are very tight. Small aircraft. The stewardess was unfriendly. No smile. We used this for both destination and return flight. No TVs and advertises wifi but if you don’t have a device you need to pay to rent one. There is no room for carry on as well. No one at the gate to assist with questions.	0
Absolutely awful. The attendants were lovely, but I’ve never been on a more uncomfortable flight. I felt as though I was sitting on a metal bar. When I boarded the plane, I went straight to the washroom. It was absolutely filthy and the toilet was full. Had obviously not been cleaned between flights. As a result, it absolutely stank, the entire flight. There was garbage in my seat pocket, and the seat was dirty. I will never fly Air Canada Rouge again, despicable.	0
Air Berlin flights out of Dusseldorf delayed all week per lounge receptionist. Ours delayed 2.5 hours which puts our connection in serious jeopardy in the US. The lounge is small and the food the most limited I have seen since flying business and first (maybe 10 years). I asked if some other food (sandwiches etc) could be provided since we were missing lunch and attendants said this is all they ever have. After reading other reviews regarding seats and service in Business I will not let American Airlines lead me this way again.	0
New York - Dusseldorf - Venice return Vienna - Dusseldorf - New York. The smallest space between rows I have experienced. Anyone over 5ft 8" will be miserable. Airport staff at Dusseldorf offered no updates on delayed return flight - verbal rebellion at the gate. Never again.	0
Business Class JFK-Berlin then on to Krakow 3 days later and then to Budapest 3 days later. In that time they managed to lose our luggage twice. In Berlin there is no one in the baggage area to help you. Lost luggage is handled by a separate outfit located in Terminal C Lobby. Finally received our bags 2 days later. Flight to Krakow was late (we got our luggage). They again lost our luggage on the flight to Budapest. Business Class was nothing special but the food was ok. We had a lot of trouble getting a glass of wine before dinner. Food service on the economy flights were either a sweet or salty roll and something to drink. Their coffee is terrible! The planes were OK - seating is a bit tight but they are an economy airline. If you need to check baggage fly Lufthansa.	0
Flew Air China from Tokyo to Frankfurt via Beijing. This was the worst airline I have travelled with. It's like the flight attendants have to be unfriendly to work with this airline. I was on four different flights and on every flight they were very unfriendly. For example on one flight I was sleeping and I didn't hear that the plane was going to land, so the flight attendant came and pushed the bottom of the backrest so hard that I nearly hit my head on the seat in front of me. Besides they never really talked to me when they brought food. So I hope I never have to fly with this airline again!	0
Moscow to Auckland via Beijing. It was probably the worst experience I've had so far with the airlines. Cabin crew was not friendly nor helpful and at times even rude. In 12 hours flight they served food twice with 6 hours break. In Beijing where my daughter and I had a transfer stop it took for us 2 hours just to move to the area where I could buy coffee. Endless checkpoints, queues, stamps, no one speaks English. Even at information desk a girl had such a strong accent and such a poor English we couldn't communicate. Another two hours I took for us to leave the airport (I had booked a hotel for our 20 hrs stay there). No clear instructions, no help. Staff is mostly rude and grumpy. To get back to the airport it took three hours. I was with a little child and that was the first company who wouldn't let passenger with the kid to go with no queue or use a separate desk. One counter served three flights! I have more stamps in my passport for simply transiting through Beijing than for all my travels in European countries. When I arrived at destination I found that luggage was unpacked, some items disappeared and others just broken.	0
Flew Ft Lauderdale to Montreal. Air Canada rouge is the worst airline to fly on. You cannot put your hand luggage in vertically. There are six seats per row in first class. There are seat posts that restrict your foot room. The seats are extraordinarily uncomfortable. The staff are friendly but the plane is impossible. We go to great lengths never to fly Rouge. We are making an extra stop on a flight to Europe this summer just to avoid Rouge. Air Canada’s wonderful brand is being destroyed by Rouge.	0
Flew Fort Lauderdale to Toronto. I am going to try and write this in a nice way. Let’s just say that Air Koryo, now has a competitor. The planes of Air Canada rouge are dated and old, the staff are arrogant and do not really know what customer service means. I asked for tea twice and no one ever brought any, I tried to call the flight attendant with the call button several times, but I guess they disconnected this function because it bothers them. The only reason I believe Air Canada rouge still exists is because they have no competition and they force you to take it as there is no other options to fly where you want to go. You pay the same price as with regular Air Canada, yet smiles from the staff are extra. I will avoid every route this company flies as they tend to ruin your vacation before it starts and if you do enjoy your vacation, they make sure your blood pressure rises on your way back home.	0
Flying from Dubai to Philadelphia via Toronto, we had occassion to spend a couple of hours in the Maple Leaf Lounge (had to pay for this even though we were traveling business class). When we arrived in the lounge, there were no seat. It was so crowded we couldn't move. We stood with our carry on and personal items for some time until someone got up and gave us seats. We couldn't even make our way to the bar or the food it was so congested. When it was time to leave, we learned that some of the congestion was from a long line that wrapped around the entire lounge. We were stunned and very stressed that we would miss our plane. We were told that the elevators were running slow and there was no stair access. We nearly missed our flight to Philadelphia. We filed a complaint with Customer Service on Nov. 12 and received an acknowledgement on Nov. 20 saying "no need to follow up. We're on it!" We received no further response. We followed with Customer Service up on 1/17, 1/31,/2/9 and 2/10. Each time we were told that we would hear back in 48 hours. Each time, no response. Apparently there is no concern for passengers This makes one wonder how they are about safely and other functions. I would not recommend this airline because if you have to deal with them there is no one there to help!	0
We are delayed by 3.5 hours, i missed my connection they have no idea what to do and no information to provide. Other airlines departed on time, the weather is good so its just incompetence of the Air Canada.	0
Air Canada left us with a horrendous ending to an otherwise amazing vacation. Flight out of Cancun at 2pm was cancelled last minute due to "maintenance issues". Got rebooked on a "9pm" flight that didn't end up departing until 10:45pm after waiting over an hour on the tarmac. The AC rep at Cancun also booked us on the late 9:45pm flight out of Toronto to Sault Ste. Marie stating "there was no earlier flight". We later found out that was a lie when 2 other friends booked the 2:10pm flight from Toronto to Sault Ste. Marie, after the lady told us there were no other flights. We then arrive in Toronto at 2am thinking there would be AC reps waiting for us to get hotel vouchers and meal vouchers, no one at any AC rep desks until 4am when we finally got hotel and meal vouchers. You only get 20 dollar meal vouchers for the entirety of the next day, when our flight wasn't until 9:45pm. Not to mention, you can only use them at the airport, where a coffee will run you roughly 10 dollars. They also had no idea where we had to go to catch the shuttle to our hotel. Fast forward to the next day, we spend hundreds of dollars on breakfast lunch and dinner, all uncompensated before finally arriving to the airport around 8pm for our 9:45pm flight. We walk into the airport just in time to receive an email from AC stating our flight has been cancelled for a 3rd time now due to "crew shortages" this time. Again, we get our hotel and meal vouchers from thr AC rep. They again tell us we will not be compensated for meals outside of the airport before giving us another measly 20 dollars in terrible overpriced airport food. We are booked on a 11:15am flight tomorrow now, but I'm sceptical it gets out due to AC incompetence. Update: flight was in fact delayed until 2:30pm. I advise anyone wanting a pleasurable flying experience to steer clear of this airline.	0
Worst experience with Aeromexico! Last night we had a flight to LA from Mexico City. From what they told us, weather did not permit us to enter LA. They dropped us in Tijuana, with no resolution for another later flight to LA, no vouchers for any food, lodging and wouldn't even help us get across the boarder - absolutely nothing. They specifically told us they could not help us because they can't control the weather (which I understand, but keep in mind we had family on the next flight to LA and they went straight to LA, no problem). Aeromexico, won't take care of you in the end.	0
Amsterdam to Huatulco via Mexico City. We were travelling as a family with 2 adult and 3 teenagers. The best thing about Aeromexico would be the staff service on the planes. The seats were not that comfortable. Our further plane to Huatulco was cancelled without any information. We asked other passengers to get information. At the counter before flying to Huatulco, we stood together in one group, telling we are a family. 3 of us were picked for leaving with the plane and the staff told my wife and daughter to go to the next counter for solving some practical problems. Their boarding were torn apart. After a while my wife and daugther were told they could not go on the airplane?! My daugther started to cry and my wife got very worried because she is not used to travel and many people, new places are very hard to cope for her. Two of my children were sitting on the plane, and I had to fight for getting my minor children off the plane again. I felt lucky to get my teenagers off the plane again. It was very stressful and Aeromexico ruined the first half of our holidays in Mexico.  Afterwards we thought we could compensation for a lunch or the cancelled flight. We were sent to wrong counter and left ourselves. This is the worst experience from ground staff we ever have experienced.	0
A trip that was supposed to be 3.5 hours became 38hrs and the airline never apologized for the delays and cancelled flights. My trip started on time without a problem flying from Houston to Monterrey. My flight was delayed one hour then 3 hours and finally was cancelled. At 5 pm the only flight I was able to get was a flight to Mexico City at 10:30pm with a connection to San Luis Potosí at 6:30 a.m. I thought at least I'll get there in time for Christmas. They gave me a voucher for a hotel room in Mexico City which I slept in it for 2 hours since I had to go back to the airport for my 6am flight which was delayed and re schedule for 11:00 am then cancelled. I had get in line for the second time (the line was taking about 2 hours To get to the front desk) got rescheduled at 2:30. Well it was cancelled again so I had to get in line for the 3rd time another hour finally told the lady to send me with another airline which she did - Aeromar. I went across the hall to check in, surprise the ticket wasn't confirmed so I had to get in line again for the third time. Another hour just to get my ticket transfer confirmed finally my flight was scheduled for 5:30. I arrived in San Luis Potosí two hours later of course I lost my brothers wedding and my car rental reservation.  It took me approximately 38hrs from Houston to San Luis. It was supposed to be 3.5 hours trip. I would never use that airline again. I ended up buying a direct return flight with United to Houston for 380 dollars. Aeromexico customer service is the worst.	0
Dublin to Alicante. To start I decided to bring my wife on a short break of 5 nights to Alicante for our upcoming 10 year wedding anniversary.I thought that I would book a holiday with 2 of our friends and without the kids which is the first time ever. We booked flights to Alicante flying from and back to Belfast for the 21-26 Sept 17 only to be emailed that due to operational commitments that the flights are cancelled. We got compensated and sorted things out, no big deal. We book for Dublin and arrive that day nearly 4 hours early only to be told that due to technical faults our flight was delayed by nearly 2 hours give or take. We got over that as going on a holiday even though we knew that because of their delay we were going to miss out on a full night in our apartment. The real mess started when we boarded the plane. To start we were on the same row 13 with 2 of us on each side. The group of people sitting behind us were drunk when they were allowed on board and they sat directly behind our rows about 3 to 4 rows on each side and the worst was sitting right behind my seat. She was in her mid 40’s and I couldn’t believe the filthy language coming out of her mouth in such a small enclosed area. She was making constant burping noises, cursing, everything that she had to say was shouted or screamed and constant sexual remarks to the male passengers across and behind her. The head flight attendant knew these people were full of drink because before the flight even took off they were shouting and roaring so she comes down a row in front of us and starts telling them that she can take anyone she wants off now who are acting to loud or she has the power to divert the plane at any stage if she feels fit and then disappeared straight away and left the customers to listen to the filth for the rest of the flight (Unbelievable). Just before take off another flight attendant asked me was I ok and I turned around and said to her was she kidding me and with that also disappeared. Again same thing happened during the flight.  So we keep there the whole flight listening to this when 10 mins before landing the head flight attendant comes down to me and says are we ok which I really couldn’t believe just 10 mins to go so I tell her everything and said that it was a disgrace and she then says that people who were sitting 2 rows up from us that she moved them to the front of the plane because of the noise and brutal language. This I couldn’t believe as we were directly in front of the noise which I let her know. During all this my wife starts to cry infront of this attendant because of how upset she was that we were left there for the flight listening to all that was going on. In getting off the plane I also let the captain know and told him that it was a joke that he let them on the plane in the first place. I pointed out that if we had reported the noise to the flight attendant (Which she knew was going on) that next thing we would meet this group in the terminal or at our resort and end up getting harassed or worse.	0
Los Angeles to Mumbai via Beijing. Never recommend anybody uses Air China. Cheaper price for tickets, I didn’t receive my luggage when I reached  Bombay. I had all my wedding stuff in my bag and wedding was after 2 days. My luggage arrived after 3 days. Waste of money and time. Lady was very rude at LAX counter, when I Checked in my luggage. They didn’t provide me special veg meal. They said you don’t have ordered. I showed  them my tickets, after one hour they give me food. Cheaper tickets but not worth it!	0
Let me start off by complimenting Air China for the good value for money service provided during my flights from Singapore to Beijing and Beijing to New York on 14th December. For the cheap fare I paid, the flying experience wasn't bad. However, the same cannot be said for my return flight from New York to Beijing on 7th January 2018 and Beijing to Singapore on 9th January 2018. My experiences were horrible. 1) I reached JFK Airport at 12.30 pm on 7th January to check in for my flight CA972, which was scheduled to depart at 3.50 pm. The check in process was messy and chaotic. There was no clear organized way and I was only able to check in a few minutes before the departure time. Quite a number of Passengers were still to be checked in after me and I believe that this was the reason the flight got delayed. 2) First, we were told that the flight got delayed for 2 hours. This was acceptable. We were also given 20 dollars worth of meal vouchers, which wasn't bad. Then, for no clear reason, our flight got delayed by almost 12 hours and we only took off at 4 am the next day. We were not given any further meal vouchers after the first one. The delay time was ridiculous. I would surely miss my connecting flight to Singapore. 3) The flight was actually pleasant and I reached Beijing at 8 am local time on the 9th January. The employees at the Air China Transfer Counter changed my ticket to Singapore on another flight 8 hours later. I was tired and asked if they would be offering any hotel. They did. However, instead of directing me to get a 1 day Visa in Beijing, they directed me to international transit. They told me that I would be able to find Air China employees there (inside the transit area) who would help me to with the hotel. All this time, I could hear them cursing in Chinese, muttering under their breath. I am not Chinese (South Asian), but understand the Chinese swear words from my stay in Singapore. When I confronted them about it, the became very rude and started avoiding me. Frustrated, I left for the transit area. Once I got in, I could not find any Air China personnel in the Transit area. I was stuck there tired with no hotel or food or lounge access. I could not go back out to confront those employees. The flight back to Singapore was pleasant. But they forgot to update my Kosher meal preference. I was too frustrated at that point to even respond. It had been 2 days on the road and I just wanted to come back home. So far this is my worst experience ever. I have nothing against the in-flight crews. They were very nice. But the Air China ground staff in Beijing were extremely rude and intentionally unhelpful. I was seduced by their low fares, but I will not be flying Air China ever again.	0
Flew Air Canada rouge from Honolulu to Vancouver. We arrived at check-in bag drop at 8.45 pm, almost 3 hours before takeoff, having checked in online. There was at most 2 agents for this line, compared to 4-6 for those doing the entire process. Each passenger or group took as much as 25 minutes, with the online check-in ignored. We stood in line 1 hour 20 minutes. We barely made our boarding time, then sat in the plane for another 80 minutes waiting for luggage and passengers before we finally left more than an hour late. Passengers were getting extremely frustrated. This is the worst check-in I have ever experienced. It was quite frankly embarrassing as Alaska Airlines passengers sailed through their check-in. It was quite unacceptable in my view.	0
Flew Calgary to Cancun. We booked our family vacation through Air Canada Vacation which was the worst mistake we have ever made. After 4 successful trips to Mexico via Sunwing and WestJet we found a great deal with Air Canada so thought let’s try it. Our first problem was arriving at the airport to find out our flight was delayed 4 hours, which they did not update on their website, they said no vouchers to my family but most of the passengers got them. After the then 5 hour delay we sat on the tarmac for an hour and with a 6 hour flight were offered only beverages, everything else you must pay for. Upon arrival no assistance was given to help passengers find our shuttle. Everyone was lost and wondering where to go. Finally got the shuttle and arrived at our resort to find out that Air Canada gave the hotel the wrong room information which meant we had one night in a lower priced room then had to move. We were highly annoyed to be woken up at 8am (6am Canadian time after arriving at 11pm) to be told to come to a meeting, we did not attend and then were woken up three mornings in a row by a very rude Air Canada Rep. The grand finale of this trip was leaving for our shuttle to find out we were delayed 6 hours and Air Canada would not give us a later shuttle option. They expected everyone to sit at the airport for over 9 hours. The annoying rep of course was nowhere to be found again leaving numerous passengers stranded and frustrated. Will never book Air Canada again, they should be ashamed.	0
SU2584 SU262 and SU271. Out April 4th back April 17th. Preferably I would never use Aeroflot again - expensive queues at every stage slow miserable long faced staff videos on board out of date food poor.	0
Dublin to Brussels. As said elsewhere a no frills airline pretending to be more. No business class to Europe but they will sell premium tickets for front seats (six across as economy) priority lane security and lounge access. The lounge is just OK with limited choice of food. Aer Lingus is the most delayed and highest cancelled flights airline I have flown, to the point I have stopped using them unless they are the only option. On my flights to Brussels from Dublin both legs were late, for Brussels you are emailed a pass for the BA lounge before your flight but unless you ask at check in your boarding pass won't be stamped for the priority security lane. As our flight was delayed and the lounge is that of IAG partner BA we were thrown out after the last BA flight left. The only upside was that the flight crew and Dublin ground staff to their credit are for the most part professional and pleasant. But Aer Lingus agents abroad can be rude -  that I was told by their agents in TLS since (on a flight my daughter was taking) "we don't do customer service if you have a problem with that complain to the police". I'll stick to Air France and change flights in CDG on EU short haul routes in future, at least they have customer service and know what it means.	0
Our flight from Berlin to Dublin was diverted to Belfast due to fog. We then were delayed for 5 hours in Belfast (partly stuck on plane, partly in airport) with no information from Aer Lingus. When we finally did get information at approx 6.00 am (7 hours after planned arrival time) we were offered the choice to wait for buses to Dublin which would take two hours or pay to make our own travel arrangements and be reimbursed, we were told to keep all receipts due to this. Myself and my partner opted to get a taxi as we both had work the next morning at 9.00 am. We arrived to Dublin at 8.00 (8 hours delay). I started to try seek reimbursement as promised from Aer Lingus the next week, they have not provided me with this reimbursement and will not respond to me. They said they will not reimburse us despite the agreement that was made on the day. Unfortunately I cannot recommend an airlane that makes false promises and has no customer service team.	0
Instead of a non-stop flight to Palma de Mallorca of 1hr 45mins the airline changed the flight routing. We first had to fly north to Dortmund Germany. Total travel time was 4 hours! Plane was totally full. The seat numbers were not correct the staff did not care. No drinks served during this 1 hour flight. Cabin crew disappeared after take off. Arrived at Dortmund told to remain in the aircraft but after a while we all had to leave with our hand luggage to wait at the gate for re-boarding 15mins later. Seating number problem still not solved. Families who were promised to be seated together complained to staff flight attendants were rude and arrogant. After take off finally drinks were served in tiny cups and a dry mini sandwich served. At Palma airport the plane was not docked to the terminal although most gates were empty. We had to leave the plane by stairs take a bus and walk all the way to the arrivals hall.	0
New York to Hong Kong via Beijing. This was the worst flight of my life. First of all I spent three hours on the check in line, after that the flight was delayed for 14 hours, and obviously I missed my connecting flight and also they lost my luggage	0
Dehli to Beijing. Worst airline to fly business class and seats were not reclining, sat like economy class and staff could barely speak English so hard to get what they are talking about they couldn’t fix. The food was not like business class, wouldn’t let us use lounge. There was no one who you can complain about service they asked us to call third party who booked the flight which is stupid, they are not responsible for inflight service. I emailed them I got email back saying sorry about your experience.	0
London to Osaka via Beijing. On first flight - Bags lost on flight to London by ground staff in Beijing. Also, Air China does not allow iPods to be turned on during the whole flight, despite mine being an iPod classic and thus effectively having the wireless abilities of a potato. The seat belt sign is also not turned off on any of my flights with Air China, and you are often told off when you go to the toilet. This is obviously ridiculous on a 10 hour flight. First flight from London to Beijing was delayed by three hours, meaning the connecting flight to Osaka was missed. There was a 14-hour delay until the next flight, the next day. No apology from anyone and made to queue for four hours in Beijing Airport for a hotel and visa. Provided with a hotel, but despite officials claiming to put me with someone of the same gender, I was put with a Korean woman. I was severely uncomfortable and I can only imagine how she must have felt. Finally got on the connecting flight and my tray was covered in stains, which the hostesses repeatedly ignored when I asked to wipe away. Unprofessional and rude, and will not fly with again.	0
Paid full Latitude fare for a flight pass ticket from MIA to YYZ recently. Overall a tragically disappointing product from AC. Everything from the check-in experience to cabin cleanliness to food quality was disappointing. They are using the tired old B767s on the Rouge routes. Premium Economy seats look like hand-me downs from another airline - Rouge hasn't been flying long enough to see so much wear. Overhead bin space is ultra-tight. One the whole bin in row 1 is unavailable causing a ripple effect down the aisle. MIA always closes the J security checkpoint at night. The remaining one at H has no TSA Precheck line, no premium line, and there are some very large flights going to South America at this time from the same area. Result is a massive pileup at security with no way out. I asked the check-in staff about this, and they were utterly apathetic. There's a new policy that cabin bags need a security tag from the airline. They don't tell you this, so if you checked in online, and wait in the security line, you get sent back to get tags from the airline. How about an email notification in advance? Food in Rouge Premium was mediocre. The IFE selection was disappointing and annoying because you needed to have an iPad on your lap, or the tray out all the time. The staff were trying their best though, and the wine was decent. That was about the only saving grace.	0
I was booked on flight AC 1656 scheduled to depart for Tampa at 12.40 am and it delayed until 2 pm. Then it was canceled and they announced to adjust the passengers on AC 1658 leaving at 4.40 pm, which eventually delayed untill 5.15 and then it took off. Traveling with Air Canada is a nightmare and this is probably the worst airline in the world, deteriorating its standard every day. Being a national flag carrier it should have very high standards, but it is not. I will never ever fly with this airline.	0
Disastrous delayed baggage policy, 4 days and still nothing, they confirmed that the bag arrived in the airport the day after me, but they still could not identify it Plus, call center for delayed bags keeps you waiting literally for hours, it's absolute insanity. Do yourself a favor and steer clear from this airline	0
When we booked the return flight from Europe on Air Berlin as a part of our round trip booking through American Airlines we were told that the Air Berlin flight from Berlin on business class would have lie flat seats (not true and the seats sere very uncomfortable). We were told that the connecting Air Berlin flight in Berlin would not require that we go through security again (not true). The food and service in business class were very poor. The cabin was hot and the attendants either could not adjust the temperature or did not pursuant to our request. The Air Berlin website cannot be negotiated to see the seat layout and select seats hence we had to rely on the Air Berlin representative telephone conversations as to location of seats. Our seats were changed 3 times without any notice. Sound quality of the entertainment system is very poor. The information regarding status of the flight and time of arrival on the entertainment system was grossly inaccurate.	0
LHR to Phuket. We were worried about travelling with this airline following the reviews on here however our flight to Phuket was on time and food and in flight entertainment was ok. So far so good. Our return journey was a different story. We arrived at Phuket airport to be told we couldn't check in as the AirBerlin plane hadn't arrived or even set off for us. Various options were thrown around including another night in Phuket returning on the next Airberlin flight. After being left in the dark for some time we were then booked on to a Qatar airlines flight which first flew to Kuala Lumpur then to Qatar where we then boarded a flight to Heathrow. In total we were delayed by 8 hours. The manner in which we were left in the dark at Phuket was very worrying and it seems from the reviews below that this is not rare for this airline.	0
Seoul to Paris via Beijing. I bought a ticket to fly from Seoul to Paris (with a flight transfer in Beijing) in order to spend Christmas and the New Year with my friends and my family.  My first flight was from Seoul to Beijing on the 23rd December was supposed to take off at 6:10pm. The flight was delayed several times and finally took off at 11:35pm. I asked to the Air China staff to change my ticket and get a direct flight from Seoul because I was sure I will never get my transfer. The Air China was very unfriendly and did not care to help. Beijing to Paris : my original flight left without me, because my flight from Seoul arrived very late. I arrived to Beijing airport and was asked to line up in order to get a new ticket. I arrived to the staff, handed him over my passport and my flight ticket. He confirmed me that I could not take the original flight and had to take a flight departing on the 24th of December at 1:00pm! I asked him if there was no other flight departing earlier. He answered me that there were not earlier flights. Then I asked him then if he could upgrade my ticket from economy class to business class. He then stood up and yelled at me.  I had to accept to take another flight at 1:00PM at an economy class seat I could not choose at the very back of the plane. The airport staff was terribly unfriendly and unable to communicate. Until I arrived to Paris, I was not sure if my suitcase was in the airplane or not. I finally took my new flight at 1:00pm and arrived at 5:45pm in Paris. I arrived to Paris at 5:45pm instead of 6:45am. I arrived to my home very tired. I will never recommend Air China to anyone.	0
San Francisco to Mumbai via Beijing. My husband followed several times through email and also through call center for knowing status of upcoming flight on 23 December but there is no response as on date 21 December. They haven't replied for meal request. Airline has no importance for even business class guest and will not recommend for travel.	0
Venice to Toronto via Montreal.  At my arrival in Toronto I discovered that my luggage was missing. it's annoying but it happens. I had to fight for 10 days in order to have my luggage delivered at home. I spent hours in sterile discussions with an overseas call center. they did all kind of irrational actions. My luggage was sent for some unknown reason to a minor airport in CT at 5 hours from my house and they wanted me to drive there to pick it up. I refused and I told them that the closest airport to my house was Rochester NY. they did not believe me and insisted that the closest one was in CT. Then after many calls I spoke with somebody that seemed to have more brain. I was wrong, my luggage was sent to Chicago. I wanted to cry. I restarted calling the craziest call center on this planet and they told me not to worry, the baggage would have delivered to my front porch the day after. After 2 days without news I recalled them and I discovered that my luggage was in Buffalo NY and it was in the hands of Fedex. I was quite happy, it was the end of the nightmare. I asked for a tracking number but the Air Canada representative was not able to give it to me. I insisted and he told me to wait. I waited some minutes and he told me that Fedex was going to deliver my luggage in less than one hour. It was midnight here in the States and I understood that he was inventing something just in order to get rid of me. I had my bags delivered after 10 days. I will never fly with them again. It has been a nightmare.	0
Coming back from Yellowknife made it to Toronto. Flight to the Soo was cancelled 3 times due to, according to Air Canada, no ground crew in the Soo. $20 voucher issued to each of us - about enough for a coke and bag of chips at airport prices. Luggage situation was ludicrous after having checked our bags then having to spend hours to retrieve them with each cancelation. Hotel room was offered for us (2 adult males) with one queen bed. Total chaos at the airport as no one could provide a straight answer to questions. Last time we'll ever fly Air Canada or route through Toronto airport	0
My suitcase didn't make it. It's been almost 72 hours and it's not here yet. I'm having a horrible experience in trying to communicate with the airline. I try to call by phone or chat and I keep getting responses from robots that are useless and annoying and direct me around in circles. I left a message through some online system and they did not respond. On the phone I waited for 30 minutes and got disconnected, then 90 minutes and got disconnected. The communication with their robots is useless and frustrating and there's no way of reaching a human.	0
The flight was delayed by 8 hours at Copenhagen. Air Canada provided updated ETA for departure three times. After third time of further delaying the flight, they announced food voucher, which was 100DKK (about $19CAD). This amount was insufficient to buy a food from a restaurant at the airport. There was no other compensation by Air Canada to the passengers suffering the extremely uncomfortable stay at the gate lounge. Due to this delay and unclear communication, I missed a critical meeting at work (estimated arrival was at 2:45PM ET, and my meeting was at 4PM for client year end review) and it has severely impacted my work. My wife and children also got impacted due to the extreme stress they had to go through, with minimal support from the Air Canada staff. Technical issues may occur with any airline/ aur craft, however how are the passengers managed in such scenario is the key for a good/ reputable airlines, which unfortunately, Air Canada failed to do so.	0
Delayed an hour before boarding and an hour after boarding. My dog was required to be at the airport in her carrier at 2:30. It’s 7:30 and we still haven’t taken off. I also have a cat who is on board with me who has been her carrier since 2:30. Have a 5 hour flight and there’s no taking off in sight. Very very disappointing	0
SU106 SVO-LAX Jan 11 2014 on A330-300. This was some older version airplane I was seated in row 16 in a broken seat and virtually with virtually no legroom. Comfort absolutely inadequate for a 13 hrs flight. After takeoff we were told that we had to land in Oslo to refuel. This turned out to be a 2.5 hrs stopover since no one was informed about our landing and need for fuel. In fact Aeroflot used the opportunity to change the crew so it is very possible that this was the actual cause for the unplanned stopover. All together we spent 16 hrs in that plane and of course missed the connecting flight on DL airlines.	0
We traveled with them over this past summer and had a day delay and then when we finally got to Moscow the connecting flight was difficult to find. They changed the gate at the last minute and didn't make an announcement. We unfortunately missed our flight because of this and they weren't sympathetic at all. Mind you we had a toddler with us and I was 7 months pregnant. It was awful. We had to pay for a new flight and didn't give us many options. I will not be flying with them again.	0
They cancelled a flight from Chicago to Dublin due to weather, and diverted the plane to Detroit, a city in the path of the storm. This was a stupid move, but by the end of this review you will see this was actually the least of their mistakes. So upon cancellation, we are instructed to collect our luggage and stand in an incredibly long line. Eventually, you learn from others that the line is only to receive a hotel voucher, and that they are providing no help in re-booking flights, with some excuse that it's not their expertise. By the time you learn this (hours into the line their customer service call center has closed for the night. They run out of hotel vouchers by the time you get to the front of the line, but that's irrelevant. As soon as you do get them on the phone, (at 2:30 AM) you are told they cannot help you because you booked using credit card points, and you must call your credit card. They were supposed to help you they cancelled the flight, its their responsibility to re-book.  They later refuse to book me on another flight because they say I lacked a transit visa for Canada. Going on the Canadian government website and pointing out that US citizens do not need such a visa doesn't help,  because their goal is to avoid helping. These lies delayed our re-booking by hours, and we watched as flight after flight filled, pushing our departure back day after day. Their blatant effort to avoid having to pay another airline to re-book us has cost me the opportunity to be in Dublin for Bloomsday.	0
Auckland to New Delhi via Beijing. Worst experience of my life. Flight took off from Auckland, flew for a few hours, then the pilots realise that there is an engine problem and lands back at Auckland. Then they kept misleading the passengers to wait for an hour, to get the problems solved, but kept delaying more. Eventually we are told to return the next day for the next flight. No compensation provided. No hotel rooms provided. Passengers were stranded from different locations without even knowing if the airline will book further connecting flights or not. No courtesy towards passengers. Rampant language problem. The flight hostess didn't even understand English. We were stranded in Auckland for a day, sleeping in the airport. After returning to check in counter the next day, they didn't take our issue or priority and we were the third last people to get our boarding passes, that too through a different route. But the next flight got delayed as well by over 8 hours. Now we are stranded here, and going to miss our connecting flights again. The airline staff are very rude and not being helpful in our matter.	0
Bangkok to London via Beijing. Boarding was a disaster! Family of 5 with pushchair was so disorganized. No care given and despite pushchair requested at the gate at Beijing it went through to baggage claim which at 1.30am and the immigration nightmare that awaited us this was a real issue. The aircraft was too hot and on board staff were unhelpful with helping with seat location and general assistance with luggage and narrow aisles whilst carrying children. Children’s meals were placed in front of the children and the foil containing the food was piping hot. Very dangerous. I told the hostess who remained emotionless and walked off expressionless. 5 hrs into the flight I was told I could not listen to my music on iPhone? Seats are very uncomfortable. Inflight entertainment is ok however the handset is dated to the 1980s so it doesn’t work and frustrates you trying to access films. Toilets are disgusting and not maintained by crew. Urine on floor and no toilet roll replenishment. I will never fly Air China ever again. Avoid!	0
New York to Tokyo via Beijing. I chose to fly Air China to my recent trip to Tokyo and I really regret it. I chose it for the really affordable price and booked it through my chase ultimate rewards, as some others had mentioned it is impossible to check in online therefore although I was able to chose my seats when booking my flight I had a hard time changing it and I wasn't able to choose my meal options. They do feed you a lot on the plane, but the food was disgusting, like even their rice was bad (tasted like paste with a play-doh consistency) - coming from an airline that has "China" in it is shocking since most Asian diets consist of rice. Since I don't eat a lot of meat I asked the flight attendant if she had a vegan or fish option and she said she will check but completely forgot about it and when she came around to ask what everyone wanted to drink I asked her again and she finally went in search of my vegan meal. She came back with it but gave me an attitude saying I should request it ahead of time next time -  if your site had given me the option to trust me I would have! The bread isn't fresh and taste stale so I pretty much ate nothing throughout my whole 12 hour flight to Beijing (layover) thankfully my reserve card enabled me to have access to the premium lounges and I chose Air China first class lounge. The food was okay I suppose, there was a good variety of hot food and the staff are attentive at cleaning up the plate and the bathroom is clean, literally I threw a tissue in the garbage can and a cleaning lady went in right after me picked it up and tossed it outside... anyways they have an open bar with limited alcohol, but their noodle station was a big hit and although I had to camp for it got myself a few bowls of these to make up for the terrible flight meal. The recliner seats in the first class lounge is trash, ripped seats and doesn't recline unless you decide to throw all your weight into leaning back then it might budge, the private rooms are the worst! Broken ripped massage chairs with a box of tissue in front I felt like I would catch something just sitting on the chair. The worst part bout this airline was that they damaged my luggage and it's nearly impossible to get through to them at their jfk line or via email. The staff that does answer the phone are rude, I submitted a claim a week ago and finally got a response asking me to send them everything I sent in the first email, like do you not read?	0
Toronto to New York. We were supposed to leave 19:15 they just announce (at 19:40) that we are not taking off until 21:00 at best. My last time flying with these clowns, very bad experience back and forth from New York to Greece and back. Inflight from Toronto to Athens no wifi and no TV set same at the return flight.	0
Worst experience ever over the last month. Delayed Flights, lost luggage, staff who are very unhappy about the airline and not afraid to share it. In fact a pilot even shared his embarrassment over the PA on a flight from Toronto to Ottawa.	0
Air Canada is definitely the most terrible airline I've ever used. They canceled and delayed their flight so many times and do not even apologize for their fault. Especially employees in Vancouver airport is extremely irresponsible and awful. They don't do anything but just stand and tell customers to just make a phone call if we need some help. I'll never use this shameless airline ever.	0
They are now playing ads throughout the cabin at the start of the flight. Disgusting. Complained to an attendant who stated I am entitled to my opinion. This is the slippery slope to paying a fee to remove adds or having sponsored flights.	0
My baggage was delayed. I filled out the baggage delay form right at the airport. The Air Canada agent promised it to be delivered to my home address the next day. I can see in my status online as if my baggage was delivered, but it never did. I tried to reach their argent by phone and waited more than 3 hours on the line and no one replied.	0
Flew from Tokyo to Tel Aviv via Moscow around December 4th. Flight from Tokyo was pretty good. From Moscow there are no direct gates so you have to take a bus to board the plane. Waited 10 minutes inside the bus while it was right under the plane already. Another one and a half hour inside the plane before they drive us back to the airport and gave us 400RUB (gets you a coffee). Overall the flight was late by almost 6 hours on a 4 hours route. From Tel Aviv the flight was late by about half an hour. Upon landing had to board the bus again. It drove for about 20 minutes to the terminal. My bags didn't arrive to Tokyo (because the connection was too short). Will never fly with them again - it was cheaper by less than 100USD but definitely not worth it.	0
When attempting to check in yesterday for an Aeromexico return flight from Mexico City to Los Angeles, I was the told the flight was oversold and there were no seats for me and my wife, despite having booked a round trip ticket on Aeromexico’s website months in advance, having a confirmation number and seats assigned. I was told overbooking by 10% was “legal” due to it being the "high travel season." After speaking with an extremely unhelpful and rude supervisor, and explaining our situation, she said she would investigate further and disappeared, only to return 45 minutes later to again repeat there were no seats for us. She promised to place us first on a waitlist for the flight we had booked. When we appeared at the departure gate we noticed our names were numbers 18 and 22 on the electronic display of waitlisted passengers. Aeromexico and its staff do not understand customer service. Avoid this airline at all costs, particularly if your arrival time is of the essence, either for a connecting flight or an important appointment.	0
I was traveling on Vacation from JFK to LIN, and this was my very first time using Aer Lingus. I don't plan to ever fly with Aer Lingus again. Some things are understandable and are outside of an airline's control. Many of the issues I had experienced were purely poor customer service. Upon arrival at JFK airport, I was immediately turned off at the fact that Aer Lingus is not part of TSA-Pre, meaning I had to go through the standard security check which takes a very long time. So I finally make it to my gate, and I am waiting to start boarding the aircraft. Our flight was supposed to depart at 17:30. 17:30 rolls around and I had to go up and ask the attendant at the gate to find out the plane wasn't cleared to land and had to continue flying past JFK to Boston? I've never heard of this happening before, but I wasn't too irritated as my connecting flight didn't depart until 0700 Ireland time. Well, the flight delay went on for over two hours, and I ended up missing my connecting flight. The delay was understandable, and I assume not the fault of the airline, but communication in regards to the delay was nonexistent. Here is where the real frustration and poor customer service begins. A chaotic, disorganized line forms at the customer service counter to arrange for new connecting flights. This line is so poorly organized that many people were waiting in the wrong line for a half hour, and the flight attendants were the ones who directed them to those lines! Exhausted after an over two-hour delay as well as a 5-hour flight, I wait in this line for 4 hours. This is not an exaggeration but timed. Finally, we get to the front of the line and are told we can't fly out until tomorrow, causing us to lose a full day of our vacation. Aer Lingus in no way compensated us for this inconvenience, or loss of a vacation day, or even offered us one of those $5 drink vouchers, nothing. They sent everyone to the same hotel that couldn't fly out overnight, which was then overbooked and many had to leave that hotel to find accommodations for the evening. This isn't the end of my poor customer service experience. Arriving at the airport for the flight back, with two hours leeway till our flight leaves, we get into a line that wraps around the check-in counter and stretches all the way down through part of the hallway. Aer Lingus had 1 check in counter. There were three desks and only one attendant. I got to my gate right before they shut the doors. I could not imagine what I would have done if I missed that flight and was stranded in another country. Last but not least, the chance to leave feedback to Aer Lingus ended the day I landed back in JFK. I guess they expect me to rate my experience while I'm flying with them. All in all, pick any other than Aer Lingus, and I pray no one else has to go through what I had to go through and have travel completely ruin their vacation.	0
Lanzarote to Dublin. I have flown Aer Lingus for many years and always found them to be very helpful and caring towards the passengers. My opinion changed a couple of weeks ago when I got horrible call while in Lanzarote that my mother was very sick and I needed to get home ASAP. I phoned Aer Lingus explained my situation. And after spending 40 mins on the phone to them they offered to change us all (myself, wife & 2 kids) to the flight that evening for nearly €2000. I kept calm and decided to go alone at a charge of €303 having to leave my wife and 2 kids to follow the next day. They said if I provide a Death Cert they'd return the change fee. Thankfully my mother is still fighting. But very disappointed in Aer Lingus that they have lost the personal touch they had and now like the others seem delighted to rip you off when they can. Especially when the availability was there to get us all home.	0
New York to Beijing. Air China have no customer service, my flight was in the early morning I missed my flight the check in people could not help told me to call office which opens at 9:00 eastern time. After the long wait, you get and agent that can not rebook the flight because they need to recalculate fees. The accounting department does not get in until later. I was told to wait 3-4 hours for the price. The fees are so excessive the agent warmed me ahead of time. I was charged 3 times the amount i paid, on top of what I paid. The ticket only states that rebooking they will recalculate fees so that leaves them free to charge what they want. I could have booked a cheaper ticket on the spot going to Expedia but then they were going to cancel my return flight and I was returning with my friend which was already there. We were returning together. I tried to avoid the fees but in the end they control the situation. I understand fees but basically I was overcharged and nothing I could do. The service is very poor. The flight attendants are curious, food is awful, entertainment if it works, is poor same movies on the return flight. The web site is also very primitive with google translation from Chinese. In addition, the return flight was from a small Chinese city, none of the agents speak English, not helpful. This airline is not customer oriented and not up to par with Star Alliance airlines. I do not recommend the airline, very unprofessional and not helpful to customers. There are plenty of other airlines.	0
Unbelievably bad experience. No movies or WiFi in the 10h flight from Toronto to Athens. The food was below average (chicken or pasta were the choices). They did not offer any wine or beer with the food (unless you purchase it and still they won't accept Discover credit cards). They let you know onboard that you may see some movies via an app which you should have downloaded while on the ground. The only good about my trip was that we arrived 1h early. I'm not going to fly with them anymore.	0
Casablanca to Chicago via Montreal. My family and I was went on vacation to Morocco from Chicago. For some reason they weren't able to book my flight completely with theirs and I had all routes with the 6 of them except for going home from Montreal back to Chicago I had a layover of about 8 hours. After being in Morocco for 9 days on the road and falling sick, I was wanting to get home with my family. We  requested them to allow that to happen. I could not afford the 150 dollars change fee and they saw my family board a plane with empty seats available but refuse to put me on it even though the baggage could have been transferred over. Then there was another flight 4 hours later that they didn't want to put me on either and said you chose to buy this ticket.	0
Picked Air Canada to fly from Toronto to Miami for a business event. Picked it mainly because it was nonstop. Little did I know about the trick that was pulled on me. I have flown AC several times in the past though lately I had not. Previously I thought the AC service hovered around average in terms on North American major carriers. For this flight, I missed the part that said "flight operated by AC Rouge". I am 5'10" and there was no way I could sit without my knees constantly getting hammered by the seat in the front. The plane looked like it hadn't been updated in decades and hadn't been cleaned in years. I could go on about how terrible the flight and plane were, but the most terrible part was that I was tricked into flying this, thinking it was Air Canada. It's supposed to be their "low-cost vacation carrier". Later I discovered that now all AC flights between Toronto to Phx, Miami, FLL, and many other warmer US destinations are being operated by Rouge exclusively. On any week day many or most passengers to these destinations are not vacationers. They are business people. People from Toronto don't fly to Phx or Miami only on vacation. Many trips are for business. Even if for vacation, people should not tricked into flying this substandard airline thinking it's something else. A very terrible airline and deceitful too. I will try to avoid AC Rouge at all costs, and AC also in general.	0
Keflavik to Montreal. My legs were buried into the seat in front of me, I am a tall guy, 6'5" I had to squirm the entire flight, including sitting on the tarmac in Keflavik waiting for staff to finish servicing the plane. Lunch was a double Kit Kat bar and a cold, chicken wrap sandwich and a drink. I missed my overnight connections in Montreal and lost my luggage too, did not arrive in Keflavik until the next day and did not get it to the hotel we agreed on until three days after we had stayed there. I spent 10 days without my luggage. Got my luggage when I returned to the Hotel in Reyjakvik at the end of the trip. And they lost it again upon arrival in Montreal and did not get it delivered home until the next day. The inflight staff did what they could.	0
I will never use Air Canada again. From the one way ticket cost at the start of December for the Christmas holiday from Calgary to Toronto to Windsor of 2000$ CDN, to saying my flight was canceled only then turning around and offering me the exact same flight number departing at the exact same time, all the way to losing my luggage on the way home, and then the attendant incorrectly entering my information in the system so now I can't even check the status of that lost luggage because he spelled both my name and my phone number wrong. What an absolute joke.	0
Air Canada completely ruined my holiday. I flew from Zurich to Charlotte via Toronto. In Charlotte, my bag did not arrive. It finally was delivered three days later. Christmas ruined. I bought another bag and returned to Zurich via Toronto. This time, both bags did not arrive. One bag was delivered a day later and the other one, two days later is still missing. New Years plans ruined. This is only a fraction of the entirely miserable experience I’ve had going back for months since I first booked. Repeated flight changes and cancelations, a forced overnight stay in Toronto (nothing to due with weather) and constant re-booking of hotels and rental cars. Customer service is almost none existent. And often literally non existent. I don’t know what is going on with Air Canada but this is shocking. And somehow just very, very sad for all involved. Choose your airline very wisely.	0
Air Canada is out of control! The organization has lost complete control of its Labour. The airline staff, the baggage handlers, the ticket agents. In this past week, December 23rd I flew from Vancouver to Toronto. Mother Nature had wreaked weather havoc across the country, Delays were expected and very much understandable. Many flights were cancelled by all airlines across the country 21 + 22 December. When I arrived at YVR for my flight on December 22 I was pleasantly surprised had our slightly delayed flight was indeed going to go today, in fact, Air Canada had organized four 777 aircraft including mine, to consolidate many of the affected customers. All four of these aircraft were departing for Toronto within an hour. So, after further delays, (2 more hours on the tarmac) we took off for Toronto. We arrived on the runway at 11:30pm, 4 hours after the original schedule l, but all too given the weather. Now the fun begins For the next 5 hours we sat on the plane, on the runway. With no updates or information we all just sat waiting. The airline staff would not serve us as much as a bottle of water. A gentleman behind me asked for some nuts several hours into the wait, told that everything was closed up. The airline staff, although being paid of course, were off duty as far as serving the customers! They did absolutely nothing for the customers, not even in Business class where we pay excessive rates, could we get a bottle of water during a 5 hour sit on the runway! A few days later Now December 27th, I am again on Air Canada flight in business class, Toronto to Doha to begin my journey back to Thailand. I have a 3 hour layover in Doha to connect to Bangkok. The airport (Terminal 3 Predominantly Air Canada) in complete complete chaos! Cannot even get to your boarding gates. Anyhow I do finally fight my way through the Air Canada customer crowds to get to my plane. As I sit in my seat, I receive a 35 minute delay notification from Air Canada. A while later I receive another 30 minute delay notice followed by a 15 and a 25. This goes on for 3 hours! Now I know my connection in Doha is As good as a gone. After take off I approach the In Charge to ask what happens now with me missing my connection l. I am advised to contact customer support after I arrive in Doha. Does anyone realize how long you wait to contact Air Canada customer support? Hours and hours if at all during their current spiral into Chaos! So bottom line, I am shot out of luck! Had to purchase another ticket! Sat in Doha airport sleeping on a bench for half day and Air Canada takes NO OWNERSHIP! And my final point to the readers, this 3 hour delay was due to shortage of baggage staff! This is the update the In Charge shared with me! They don’t have enough staff! Therefore they cannot get the planes loaded with your baggage on schedule! Have a look at the fields of baggage all over Pearson! It’s out of control! Don’t take the very high risk of flying with Air Canada You will be sorry you did	0
travel between DUB and Frankfurt each week. Lately I am beginning to think about Lufthansa or Ryanair as my preferred carrier due to the following.  Prices for flights have crept up considerably and it is now costing €130 on average more for a return flight than 6 months ago. I am a member of Aer Club and the roll out of this frequent flyer club has been a shambles, a situation that continues 5 months after the establishment of new scheme. Outstation lounges tend to be mediocre. Crew on short haul not that friendly. Aircraft are dirty as no cleaning done on turnaround.	0
I have booked an Air China flight from Los Angeles to New Delhi via Beijing. It was for 3 family members and myself. I used Air China  website of to buy the ticket. Flight departure time was 10 AM, from LAX airport. We were checking around 8 am when Air china customer service agent denied me boarding because in their reservation system my name was misspelled. They told me they can't release my boarding pass and I had to call customer call center, when I called their customer service number, no one picked up phone for 45 minutes. They denied me boarding and kept us waiting for more than an hour. Finally after multiple discussion with unfriendly Air China agents, they gave me back my checked-in luggage and said they can’t help me. We had to wait for 9 hours on LAX and booked a different flight 4 times expensive than the existing one. Check the specifics on ticket as soon as you get the booking confirmation, I take full responsibility of that, but customer care is responsible to help customers! Choose the airline carefully, less price doesn't mean better value.	0
I was so excited when I noticed there is finally a direct flight to Berlin. Now, I cannot tell you how disappointed I am. Bad food, no wifi, no wine or beer, almost no legroom (I am tall, so my knees where hitting the seat in front of me). Usually we as Canadians are pretty friendly people but I had the feeling that AC rouge gave their flight attendants a special training in how to be rude. Even easyJet or Ryanair have friendlier service. There is no onboard entertainment, you have no idea where you actually are (not a single screen). My flight from Berlin back got delayed and no one told us what was going on or what to expect. It was really hot at the gate, not enough seats and we didn't even get some water. Next time the one hour layover in Amsterdam or Munich but with proper service, more legroom, friendly flight attendants, a nice glass of wine and a movie.	0
Stay away from Air Canada if you can! This company has been dropping the quality of its service over the years. And every year it seems to get worse! The customer support line is horrible and you have to stay hours on the phone to get a hold of somebody. Good luck if you're late to a connecting flight or lost your luggage in a foreign country with Air Canada. You're pretty much on your own! Let's not forget about the incredibly complicated system to report a problem or request a refund after the fact. I feel that they do this on purpose to make it complicated so you give up on the refund. In addition, Air Canada is doing everything it can to take away your money. Until recently, you could take two 32 kg bags to countries with long routes, now it's a 23 kg bag and an absurd price to carry an additional bag. Air Canada does not care about you. I've had multiple experiences where my flight got delayed, they took 1.5 to 3 hours to pick up the phone when I needed it the most, left me stranded in foreign countries, cancelled the flight minutes before it should have left, not allowed me to board because of a simple name mistake that they took long to fix, deflecting ownership when tickets got purchased from other reputable websites, lack of seat or cabinet space due to overbooking, insane delays while leaving the Toronto airport, lack of communication between employees, and lack of of flight availability in connections. Do I need to go on? Do we all get the point? It's a shame for a company of this size and past reputation to get to such low standards. I've been traveling since I was a kid and I've always liked Air Canada. I always felt like I was "at home" when traveling with Air Canada. Nowadays, just remembering the name makes me angry because of the negative things the company did to me. Shame on Air Canada for firing thousands of their staff. This is one of the reasons why they are struggling to keep up with the customer needs. This goes to show how the leadership team at Air Canada are unprepared for the job and don't care about their customers or the company reputation. All they care about is their big fat bonuses at the end of the year. I really hate writing reviews but I felt an obligation to do so given the horrible service and after what the bad service they provided to me. Again, stay away from Air Canada if you can.	0
I booked a flight for my parents to go from Cleveland to Montreal to celebrate Christmas, their flight was supposed to be on Friday December 23rd afternoon, initially there route was Cleveland - Washington DC - Montreal, due to the storm the first flight was switched to connect in Toronto instead of DC, then the Toronto flight got canceled, the airline did not offer to reschedule and the kept Toronto - Montreal flight, the photo I shared is how long I have been waiting on the line to speak an agent, and it is still counting. They indicate my waiting to be 35-52 minutes	0
Does Air Canada have a plan for bad weather? Obviously their plan is no information for customers, low staffing, can't reach them on the phone, completely disorganized, just dump people in the airport with no assistance. When I checked in to my flight from Frankfurt, the automated system checked me into my current flight and the next flight that was scheduled to Indianapolis. Indianapolis was canceled, but I was not checked out of the flight. Since I was not off-boarded the replacement flight is there but I can't check in because I was not off-boarded from the original flight. Sadly the check-in crew at the airport can't figure this out and tell me I have to speak with reservations. Reservations are over the phone only and they are not answering the phone. 24 hour later, I finally spoke to reservations and they informed me only check-in at the airport can off-board me from the original flight, they can only get me a rescheduled flight after check-in off-boards me from the original flight. The only way to speak to check-in is to stand in the line with people checking their baggage, so you stand in line for an hour or more. Then check-in says I'm off-boarded, reservations says I'm not. And they don't talk to each other. So I have to wait in the at bag check line for the 3rd time to tell them I am not off boarded. Finally get it straightened out, start checking into flight and it gets canceled. This was the first of 4 different flights to get scheduled and canceled. My daughter finally drove 10 hours to Toronto, Canada to pick me up. I did not know and Air Canada did not tell me that I needed a reference # from baggage at the airport. I was escorted 3 times into the international carousel area looking for my bag, someone could have mentioned this? Since I do not have this # I cannot put in a request for lost baggage on-line. And of course the customer support line for lost baggage is not taking calls. I understand this was weather related, but with some planning and an all hands on deck mentality, this could have been a tolerable experience for customers instead of a nightmare.	0
Flew Aeromexico to Managua from San Francisco and of 14 interactions with their clerks (check in, etc) I experienced issues 12 times. Several times the clerks smiled while I was walking them through my issues. Three of four flights we were bumped from the flight despite having a clear reservation and forced to take another flight. One of these bumps ended up forcing my girlfriend and I to stay in Mexico City (not my final destination) and robbing us of one day of a long awaited weeklong vacation. Honestly the people that work for the company don't care and you will feel it at every check in counter. With all of the interactions and issues I faced with Aeromexico I feel like I have enough data to say that 50-75% of the time they will screw up your reservation in one way or another. Its a gamble I will never take again and I'll be happy to pay 3 x the cost of another flight to avoid Aeromexico in the future. I saw these types of reviews before booking originally and wished I had paid more for my flight.	0
My Business Class flight recently from Boston to Dublin was 23 hours delayed. I asked for compensation but had no response from Aer Lingus for weeks.  As a result of the above, Aerlingus did not capture my tier points for my Aerclub frequent flyer account. This was a system error on their part. Despite having written to them several times, they refuse to recognise the points added and upgrade me to the next tier even though the missing flight would take me to the next tier. This is customer care of the worst kind (absent, and even outright refusing to care). Response times are long, and the replies tend to be unhelpful and off the point.	0
New York to Tokyo via Beijing. This is by far the worst airline I have ever flown. Although it’s marginally less expensive than some other airlines it’s not worth the headache. Every single person we encountered that worked for this airline was rude and showed no empathy. The food is hardly edible and drinks are barely edible. The real nightmare started when we missed our return flight. They would not put us on another flight later that day or the next day. When we offered to buy new tickets to Beijing to make our connection to New York they informed us that our second leg of the trip would not be honored because we missed the first flight, change fee or buy completely new tickets. They also said that they could not change or sell any tickets from the two airports in Tokyo. How is this possible? We walked to the American Airlines counter and bought two tickets to JFK. I’m utterly disgusted at how irresponsible and unreasonable Air China is. Passengers miss their flights all the time.But to be so unreasonable to people that are thousands of miles away from their home countries is unfathomable.	0
Calgary to Punta Cana via Montreal. I been flying with AC back and forth since we moved to Canada 5 yrs ago. It was really sad to see how Air Canada has declined its customer services to the lowest level, especially in International flights. If cheap flights means poor service I will prefer to paid more. The plane was so old and dirty. It didn't have any backseat entertainment and or air conditioner in the seat panel. Everything was available for a fee including blankets and pillows, any food, and movies (Ipad for 10 dollars). Next time, I will be sure to double check before I book my international vacations with AC, if I do it again. I will be more that happy to pay a couple extra hundred dollars to have a confortable flight with food and entertainment.	0
left Delhi on Dec 22,2022. When I land in Toronto I learned my 9am connected flight to Vancouve is canceled. After 17hrs at Toronto finally my flight depart at 11pm. The staff behaviour at airport is terrible. When we arrived at Vancouver after 35 min waiting for luggage they said no luggage go home and file on line. After 3 days no news on luggage. I am holding the line today from last 3 hrs to get any update. Won’t recommend any body to travel by air Canada.	0
We began our journey with Air Canada on the Wednesday before Christmas. My boyfriend and I had planned to fly into Montreal as it is one of the closest airports to my childhood home. We wanted to have a nice dinner and do some sightseeing in Montreal before heading continuing our journey home for the holidays. We were scheduled to land in Montreal on that Wednesday night around 6:30 PM EST. We were delayed 3 different times, now making our departure from Tampa around 8 PM EST. During the boarding process Air Canada’s computer software needed to be restated and all passports had to be manually typed into their system. Because boarding took so long, we were now not leaving until about 8:45 PM EST. As my boyfriend and I were sitting in our seats waiting to taxi out to the runway, the captain came on and told the plane “The wing has been damaged. We are not sure if we will be able to fly or if it can be fixed. Well let you know as soon as possible”. We waited at the gate, with little to no communication from the airline crew for over 2 1/2 hours. At one point I walked back to use the airplane restroom and one of the stewardesses was laying down across the empty row of seats trying to sleep. We finally left Tampa after 11 PM EST and arrived in Montreal after 3 AM EST. We were scheduled to fly out of Montreal back to Tampa on the 26th of December. Christmas morning I received the email from Air Canada informing me it was time to check into our flight home. When I put in the reference number the email provided me, I kept getting a message that said “Sorry we are unable to process your request at this time”. I knew something was wrong since the tickets in my Air Canada app were now missing. We both called Air Canada and waited on the phone for over 4+ hours before speaking to a person. Air Canada informed us that our trip was canceled by them because we had “no showed” for our initial flight to Montreal. I have two claim numbers for the initial flight to Montreal for reimbursement for being delayed 9+ hours, and I have receipts from the food that we bought on the flight there. Our passports were scanned 3 separate times by Air Canada personnel. When we said that this incident caused by Air Canadas personnel was a huge breach of Canadas National security, they simply agreed as if it was not a big deal. You can’t let people on a plane without knowing who they are! Air Canada told us it was our fault that we had missed the flight, even though we have proof we were on the flight. They informed us that they would not be looking at the information to prove we were on the initial flight and that they would not be helping us get home to Tampa. We were on our own. They would not help pay for meals, food, or travel that would be necessary over the next couple of days due to their lack of accountability. We spent our entire Christmas Day on the phone with Air Canada to be told, we’re screwing you over and we’re not going to do anything about it or help you at all. Merry Christmas to everyone except Air Canada.	0
Worst flight experience I have had. My flight has already been cancelled twice due to weather conditions when other planes flying to Vancouver the same time as me are able to somehow board and take off. During my second rebooked flight, I went to the airport, was notified of a 4 hour delay, and after waiting the full 4 hours plus the 2 hours it takes me to go through checkin and security, they announce the flight is cancelled. I then have to line up in customer service for more than 8 hours just to claim my baggage and rebook a ticket. No hotel accommodations of any sort whatsoever and my next flight is booked 4 days later! Not to mention customer service closes at 11:30pm and there were hundreds of people in line behind me who are potentially unable to claim their baggage at all. The staff is incredibly disorganized with many staff not able to provide up to date information as they are not informed as well. There is no way of rebooking cancelled tickets online or through phone (as Air Canada is not taking calls), the only way is to stand in line for hours at an airport with no guarantee of possibly any rebooking at all as all the flights are overbooked. It’s absolutely disgusting how Air Canada treats their customers.	0
Chicago to Mexico City via Cancun. Terrible airline. The only nice thing is the tv monitors with free movies but they always interuppted with ads. Our flight out of Cancun took forever to get going and got really hot. No aircon. Staff said pilot wouldn't turn on so had more power for take off? Flight from Mexico City to Chicago was delayed over one hour. Sat at gate, no drinks given.  Good thing sun was down otherwise we would have baked. Had a meal on the flight - a ham sandwich, but no mayo. Asked for a coke, staff didn't speak english and no ice in drink. They didn't pick up trash for over an hour. They never asked if anyone else wanted another drink. I will never fly them again.	0
TXL-AUH AUH-TXL. Staff were surly and unhelpful. We were travelling with an 18 month old and they gave the bassinet seats we had requested/reconfirmed to two men instead of us. Food was terrible service was non-existent. Plane was old and poky considering length of flight. Never again.	0
We flew from JFK to Tegel. The flight was over an hour late taking off and no explanation or apology was given. No dinner provided and a very poor explanation given for this ie there was a potential for clear air turbulence although during the flight we experienced little turbulence. Breakfast was provided but it was cold and of very poor quality. My wife had no audio for her in-flight entertainment and staff were unable to rectify this. All reading lights that were switched on were unable to be switched off so it was very difficult to get any sleep. The seats were uncomfortable and tended to tip you forward. There was no information provided about destination time or weather and the travel map on the in-flight entertainment did not work. Also no one could provide information about our next flight out of Berlin in spite of us having a forward booking e- ticket indicating that there was a service to be operated by Air Berlin. The general demeanour of staff was surly or apathetic. Without a doubt we would never choose to fly Air Berlin again.	0
Manila to Vancouver via Beijing. You have to give one thing to Air China, they are consistent. Unfortunately, they are consistently horrible. From ground staff, customer service agents, to in flight personnel, this company needs to revamp its customer service. I personally wish I wasn't lured by their great seat sale - I'd rather pay three times for a ticket to fly with a company that cares for its passengers. They caused me a lot of grief, and a little communication would have gone a long way at making my travel with them smoother. This is a company that lacks flexibility, empathy, and the know-how to be able to retain customers. Judging by their track record online, they seem to be effective at creating disloyalty. Do yourself a favor and read the Terms and Conditions of their ticket before purchasing, if you can't be bothered, look for another flight with another airline.	0
Sydney to Soul via Beijing. If you need to change anything relating to your ticket you will be charged double what you would have paid through your Travel Agent. For example, if you need to amend your flight you will be charged a $AUS300 administration fee per ticket. Literally 2 minutes work! If you want to upgrade prior to departure the cost is double (in some cases more) compared to if you booked prior to departure.  We do multiple OS trips a year and we will never ever fly with Air China again. Don't get stung! Food is appalling, staff have very poor english and the overall experience will wreck your holiday. With all the choices of airlines available, I strongly recommend you choose another airline, even if it costs slightly more.	0
Flight delayed with no explanation. They had us move to different terminal which was on the other side of the airport. All announcements were in Chinese and not translated. Zero effort to communicate. I understand delays but I’ve flown enough to know what good customer service is. I will never fly this airline again.	0
San Francisco to Dublin via Vancouver. Air Canada was the worst flying experience we have had. We flew to and from Dublin on this airline and every flight was delayed at least 2 hours. Our flight to Dublin ended up taking 24 hours. They lost our luggage on the return flight and we are still waiting for it. The individuals working for the airline were kind and seemed to be doing their best in a very dysfunctional and inefficient company. On board, the Wifi would not connect and the online entertainment was broken.	0
Horrible experience. Flights canceled "due to weather". But actually because ground crews are understaffed. They say they will rebook you, no just stand in one long line after another to find out they've already canceled your trip. Sure you can get a refund. But your stuck half way to your destination. Airlines need to build margins Into their schedules and not greedily pack out every flight. Otherwise peoples flights who get canceled literally have no way to get to their final destination. Go with a company that actually has customer service.	0
Worst experience flying I have had. Multiple flight cancellations, left stranded at the airport, no one at the information desk, and it takes an average of 2 hours on hold for anyone to pick up the phone from customer service. No respect for anyone’s time from Air Canada. My flight from Detroit to Toronto was delayed multiple times, it was canceled and no one at the front desk could help, all they could offer was “call Air Canada”. After being on hold for an hour and 45 mins, someone could finally be bothered to pick up the phone. The best they could offer was a flight the next morning. My original flight was at 6AM. They didn’t offer me any accommodation and I would be spending over 24 hours at the airport. Fine. I wait. Only for the next morning to roll around and they messed up the booking so my connection takes off before i get there. Another 2 hours on hold before i can talk to someone at “customer service”. Then they put me on a flight to Seattle to make it to Vancouver that same day. I arrive at Seattle and flight to Vancouver has been cancelled and moved to the next day. Currently still on hold with Air Canada. Tried talking to the guy at the kiosk but he was “busy” and then he just left. If you value your time (at this point I’ve wasted 2 of my vacation days at airports and on hold), and your money. If you want to be treated with respect don’t book Air Canada.	0
If you want to have a timely trip to your destination, then pick another airline. Air Canada painstakingly delayed our flight by 20 minutes intervals every hour. Once we finally boarded the flight, we had to sit on the plane for an additional two hours “waiting for fuel”. If you want your bag to arrive to your final destination, pick another airline. After years of flying, I’ve never not received my luggage. Second time flying air Canada - they had a personal goal to change that. Thanks Air Canada. Hope you have everything you need for your holiday.	0
Last night and - still ongoing today, I had the worst trip with Air Canada. First flight from Boston was delayed and they told us 2 hours before, arrived to Canada rushing to make the connection flight when they told me that flight has been canceled, due to crew constraints. They lost my luggage, rescheduled a full day. Between looking for luggage and rescheduling, I waited from 7 pm to 1:30 am to be able to leave the airport to the hotel. I arrive the next day and that next flight is also delayed (2 hours before departure) because of pilot scheduling issues, as if they just found out about this trip. Super inconsiderate for people's limited vacation time. I got this ticket months in advance calculating my vacation days just so I can spend them at airports, baggage claims and desk assistance. Theres also no one to call, and they consider themselves not responsible for these cancelations/ delays because I booked with a booking agency. Safe to say I will never travel with Air Canada again.	0
Brussels to Fort Lauderdale. Rude cabin crew, boring entertainment system, outdated cabins, dirty cabins, and even delayed flights. This is unacceptable, Not impressed by the airline as it used to be a decent airline, but because of the pandemic, the service was downgraded very poorly. I am not happy with this airline and will never fly with them again.	0
Never again will I fly with this horrible airline. Every Aeromexico staff member that I tried to ask for help at Mexico City airport was useless. After being directed by 5 different staffers to the wrong areas for my flight, I was told by the ticket rep that I missed my flight. She then told me that they were holding the plane and that I was to run to the gate with all my baggage. Yep, she sent me through security with my checked bag. Of course my bag wouldn't clear security as it had many over sized liquids and the security staff started hooting and hollering like they hit the jackpot because I was trying to smuggle it in. I tried to explain that the plane was waiting for me and that I was told to bring all my bags by the ticket lady, but of course no one spoke English. I was so upset and obviously missed my plane. Aeromexico staff are useless. The trip cost me an extra $1400 to get back home with a different airline and the stress was unbearable. I received an email after my flight down there asking to fill out a survey on there service but received nothing when they made me miss both flights that I had still to take. Took my money, but couldn't be bothered to find out why I wasn't on those flights. 	0
I have never flown Aeromexico and I am now convinced that this is actually a blessing in disguise. I am planning a destination wedding in Mexico and was ready to book most of my flights with Aeromexico. Over the past couple of months I have tried to book Aeromexico flights numerous times but was never successful. You may be able to get to the last web page of the booking process but are then told that you have to "contact customer service". Calling customer service will require a few hours of your day. You may then find out that the advertised flight on the Aeromexico website is not feasible as the layovers do not provide enough time. The representative will then tell you that you cannot book the flight that you saw on their website. You may have been successful booking a flight via a third party (travelocity, expedia, etc.) only to find that your charge has been refunded a few days later. No warning, no email, no communication from AM at all! The "chat" function on the Aeromexico website is constantly experiencing "technical difficulties". If you actually manage to make it through to a waiting room, good luck! I have spent 2 hours in there without ever having talked to anyone. As a very frequent and global traveler I must say that I can only wonder how this business generates any profit. I can only imagine what the experience must be like once you actually get on one of their flights.	0
Absolutely worthless - no good at all - save your time and money Thanks Aeromexico! For letting me drive 4 hours to make a 9:15 flight to LAX, so I could check in on time - only to be denied and told I couldn't fly for two days. No warning and no offers of compensation. Only after three different phone calls was I able to make a flight tomorrow. One day down from the extended family vacation - and no offers of compensation. One guy even had me on hold for an hour hoping I would go away.	0
Beijing to London Heathrow, business class. Having flown out on Thai Airways, my trip plans changed and a last minute visit to China meant I got booked onto this return flight. I like China, I know and like the Chinese people, but this airline is just unbelievably awful. The lounge in T3 PEK airport was so crowded and hot, food absolutely vile, and I thought getting onto the flight might improve things. No! My neighbour sat and hacked up phlegm for most of the trip, occasionally spitting this into his glass or cup. God knows what germs he was spreading. The seat was okay, but cabin was dirty and had a pungent and very unpleasant smell. Forget the IFE as choices are typically Chinese limited. After the lounge food offering, it got worse on the flight and truly resembled and smelt like dog food - and this was the western choice I opted for. Final elements of enjoyment was when I walked to the toilet about halfway through the flight and noticed 4 cabin crew (in full uniform) spread out fast asleep on some vacant business class seats! Air China is a disgrace to Star Alliance, the Chinese, the airline business at large, and I strongly urge you to reconsider before ever setting foot on one of their planes. (I flew 2 domestic sectors with China Southern and they are much, much better airline).	0
Beijing to Los Angeles. I did not anticipate the sub-par quality of this horrid airline. Everything was awful - improper disclaimer or explanation as to portable charger in baggage (security seized it), very late flights with no heads up. The single worst airline food my wife or I could ever imagine eating (I'm a vegetarian, she's not, and we both found the food to be incredibly awful, and, on this particular flight, they changed our seats without our knowing, and provided awful cramped seats instead - and wouldn't offer up any of the many empty Premium Economy or Business Class seats in apology. This, paired with the PRC's absurd rules on no phone use in the plane made everything with this airline just miserable. Horrible bag weight limits too.	0
Toronto to Bridgetown. We left at 8.15 am and travelling with a small child (3 years old) after leaving early in the morning. While sitting in the seat I realized that my knees were rubbing the butt of the passenger seated in front of metal. There was a long line for the toilets since economy only had two toilets. I requested a cup of warm chocolate for the child but the only warm beverages available were coffee and tea.  I am extremely disappointed with this service.	0
"Welcome to Air Canada Rouge, our top of the line air taxi features chairs and retractable folding tables." I would not wish this flight to my worst enemy. I was traveling with a 1 year old and my 4 month pregnant wife, we were not expecting any and we certainly did not get any special treatment. When I tried to do online booking at exactly 24 hours prior to flight it told me everything was packed and we had to sit at the exact spots, we couldn't change to go to a 2 seater, instead we were in a 3 seat spot, couldn't get a baby bassinet either. 11 hour flight, no TVs or any entertainment, this plane had to be at least 30-40 years old. They rented ipads for $10, yes the last thing I want to do is hold an ipad with a 1 year old in my lap, meanwhile the batteries kept dying on the ones that other passengers got, I had an ipad of my own which couldn't load the content as I didn't download the app prior to flight, thats what I was thinking while boarding with my family "how to download the app". I am 6"ft3 the seats were made I think for someone who is 3"ft 1, the armrest conveniently has the controls to call the staff and turn on the lights, which was very helpful every 5 seconds when I accidentally kept calling staff who very rudley come by and turn off the call button and the one time I actually wanted water for my 1 year old I was asked "What is the problem here, is there a problem. Meanwhile the girl next to us who was sleeping put her elbow on to the same arm rest and turned on the light by accident right into our faces, 500 watts it felt like for 11 hours. The staff were definitely sent here as some kind of punishment, they hated their jobs, each other, the passengers and most of all themselves. The plane was so dirty I have no words for it, the magazines looked like dogs had taken a bite out of them, the floors and the seats were full of crumbs and the bathroom, my goodness had ash trays for the ancient days when you could smoke. $1450 per tickets, no alcoholic beverages. The cookies were ok. Overall horrible flight, for the price and the distance its actually disgusting.	0
One of the worst flights ever flying from Prague to Toronto! It started with the cattle call for boarding. No organization! We were informed that if we wanted to watch movies, etc., we needed to download the AC app. Really? The captain could not find smooth air for 9.5 hours. The flight attendants looked like they just got out of bed and came to the plane. They were surly and not professional. One flight attendant in particular was flippant with his responses to me. When I asked why we were being charged for alcohol on an international flight he said, "You should have flown Air Canada". I said I thought we were flying Air Canada, and his response was, "you're flying the no frills Rouge". As far as food goes, it was awful! The best item was the package of cookies.	0
My flight on Dec. 18, 2022 was at 9am it got delayed until 3pm by 4 or 5pm they cancelled our flight. Other delayed flights were able to leave but Air Canada decided to cancel our flight. No hotel provided no food or drink voucher. Air Canada employees are rude and not helpful all they say were "there's nothing we can do to help". I was rebooked for the next day at 7:30pm. I was forced to check in my carry on luggage by this white girl she said that my luggage was too big. I flew the day before from SFO to Winnipeg and never had a problem with my carry on luggage. She was really rude and rolling her eyes at me saying to the other staff loudly so I could hear her "How do you think they will react if we start charging them for their luggage" then gave me a very nasty look. I waited for hours to pick up my luggage at the baggage claim. We were not allowed to leave because if we do they wont let us back in. I didn't eat or drink since 9am because of all the run arounds Air Canada staff giving us.  I will never fly Air Canada again. You can really tell they do not care about their customers. I think people should put this airline out of business. Now I know I will never find my luggage because they simple are are worst of people.	0
Terrible experience. My flight was delayed due to delay in fuelling the aircraft, two hours delay. As a result I missed my connecting flight to Montreal. Thankfully the connection flight was also Air Canada, and they automatically booked my to a next day flight. However, the problem is that they didn’t give me an option to choose which flight I wanted to get rebooked on, there was no need to book it for the next day as there was another Air Canada flight in 1.5 hours. They allowed other people to rebook to this 1.5 hours flight leaving same day, but they didn’t allow me, the reason they gave me was that they cannot transfer my luggage in 1.5 hours to this flight. How is it that in my earlier travels they have transferred my luggage with 45 minutes layover and they were not able to do this time in 1.5 hours. They had themselves decided which flight I should get rebooked on (in this case it was next day) and they weren’t ready to listen to any logical reasoning from customer. The lady at customer service was angry as to why I am not waiting in line, but she wasn’t listening to the fact that there were 50 people waiting in the line and if I waited the 1.5 hours flight would have been missed. She wasn’t listening to me at all, and calling my behaviour unacceptable and threatening to call security. I was in tears. I get it’s busy - all customer service workers are stressed but there was not once that I felt the customer service was acceptable. Where is it written in your policies that luggage transfer doesn’t happen with in XYZ time limit?	0
I am currently stuck in Vancouver and was unable to continue my onward journey, even though I was issued my boarding passes to my final destination, because as I have been told by the agents here in Vancouver, there was an the airline made an error with my ticket and your agents in Edmonton knew about it and should never have let me fly in the first place, I am now having to sleep in Vancouver before proceeding to travel for more than 48 hours for a journey that should have taken about 18 hours, missing out family events and income. This is highly unacceptable and should have be caught, had you employed competent individuals.	0
Monterrey to Mexico City with Aeromexico, and once again, the airline cancelled the flight 3 hours before departure. They send an e-mail informing that they have reserved one place in the next flight, but actually they didn't. This is not the first time that Aeromexico cancelled fligths, and almost 70% of their flights are delayed.	0
Los Angeles to Mexico City, and Aeromexico is the most disappointing airline ever! This was my first time flying with them and they lost my luggage. I was in Mexico without any bag and they didn't manage to find it while I was in the country. On top of that, extremely poor support in helping me to even be updated with what the situation is and their rep was extremely rude in not wanting to help! I still don't have my bag nor have they cared to update me about it	0
Dublin to Fuerteventura EI770 on December 27th with my wife. Seats 5a and 5b. We waited until after the food and drink service finished before reclining our seats. The people behind were kicking and pulling the seats for quite a lot of the way. About 40 mins before landing the man behind just pushed my wife's seat forward aggressively several times. We called the cabin crew, and the CSD came down to us. Despite the couple behind being quite drunk, and very aggressive, her way of dealing with the situation was to ask us to put our seats upright. We complied with her request and then had to put up with our seats being kicked and loud comments for the remainder of the flight.  This is the worst experience I have ever had on any airline, and it was compounded by the way it was dealt with. At no point did the CSD speak to them and ask them to calm down, nor did she ask them to stop disturbing us. It felt like we were being punished by the airline, and that the most aggressive passengers were being rewarded. If they were that drunk over three hours into the flight then it had to be due to drink sold onboard to  them, and this is unacceptable. I appreciate that the CSD did what they felt would easily diffuse the situation, and we complied with her request. However she should have made appropriate requests of the other passengers, and she did not. When we landed and had just left the runway, the drunk guy behind stood up in the aisle and proceeded to get his luggage down, we were on the taxiway, they just left him alone despite this being a safety issue. I received a form response from Aer Lngus, and I thought they would at least give us a complimentary drink on our return flight, but nothing. I have to give this the lowest possible rating as it was the worst flying experience in my life, including customer service.	0
The baggage drop off service on both Mon October 1st from Zurich (1 hr 10 mins) and the return flight on Thur October 4th at Berlin Tegel airport (1hr 25mins) is simply ridiculous. Why bother to check in on-line and then expect such a delay to drop off your bag. The staff counters were opened for 4 lines (incl business) at Zurich and 3 lines (incl business) at Tegel. I for one will never bother with Air Berlin again as I simply do not have this time to waste on such a pathetic level of customer service.	0
Delayed departure resulted in our seats on a connecting flight being resold to other passengers and an involuntarily rebooking on a flight leaving the following day. The airline offered no compensation, hotel voucher or apology. Poor and unacceptable customer service.	0
Took 90 mins to board and 50 to disembark Very unorganised, staff were not giving any assistance. Most flight attendant were rude to me, disappeared after meal service. For Air Canada, they think the delay is normal and on schedule is not important. The legroom is below industry standard.	0
I specifically booked my last overseas flight to Canada on another airline, hoping to avoid Air Canada. Only after I paid was I informed that the 2nd and longest leg of my flight was operated by Air Canada.  None of my experience involves any delays or unexpected problems. It was a totally on schedule and uneventful flight. But the service on board is so atrocious. My husband and I, both Canadian and totally fluent in English, were constantly amazed at the rude behavior of every flight attendant on our side in economy class. Every simple and humble request for normal things like a cup of water, a blanket, were met with scorn and loud chastisements. The not-Canadian lady sitting next to me, who was extremely polite, was shocked at every interaction with the flight attendants.  Air Canada flight attendants have increasingly become the worst ambassadors for the country.  have flown all over the world with dozens of different airlines for the last 30 years, and can safely say that Air Canada has the rudest flight attendants I have ever experienced. Also, nobody seems to clean the bathrooms even on 17 hour flights.	0
Juarez to Guatemala. Be careful when choosing Aeromexico! Flight was cancelled twice due to weather and when I called to reschedule my flight I was told the next available was in 2 days. I scheduled this flight and called back 10 min later to see if I could catch a flight from the US to my connection but was told it would cost twice as much as the total of my trip, even though online I could verify it was cheaper and was offered a flight the next day which I would have to pay a "difference in cost" - which would also cost me more than the total of my current trip. I asked why I was not offered this flight when I had initially called and I was given the run around. If I cancelled my trip I would not get any money back and would only get a credit. I had also upgraded to premier class over the phone with one of their agents and was told I would be charged a total of $125 but my card was charged $215. When I complained to customer relations they denied it, stating they only show a charge of $125 and I would have to send in my bank statement. I sent in my bank statement and have not heard a word from them in almost 2 months. Tried calling to see if I could get in touch with someone regarding this issue but apparently the only way to contact customer relations is via email. Worst customer service ever!	0
Even though our experience was good from Vancouver to México City (red eye, so not much to review really), the Aeromexico flight home was one of our worst ever. We arrived to the indicated section at the airport (national area) and there was mayhem. A total chaos. We had business class tickets but there was no designated line. Trying to get the attention was impossible and, after many extremely rude directives to go back in line, finally one man told us that travelers to Canada (and Canada only) were to go to the international area. With all our luggage we went just to find another single line for all. When we asked about the business class line, we were told (very rude again) that was the only line and that we had to get in line, regardless of what ticket we got. After a good amount of time, we were booked by a rude lady who was more interested in our luggage weight than giving service. We were told that this only happens with flights to Canada because we don't have a reciprocal visa system. We went to the lounge which is old, and in need of repair. Seats are broken, food is bad although the drinks were ok - the worst lounge we ever visited. The boarding was chaotic and the service onboard minimal, no courtesy and once dinner was served, the flight attendants disappeared. Our luggage, tagged "priority" was not in the first batch and our fragile tagged box came with the luggage and not sent to the proper area as it should happened. Even though this is a direct flight, we rather do a stop just to get the service we paid for. Never fly Aeromexico again!	0
Vancouver to Bangkok via Beijing. Worst airline we have ever flown with. I was injured while on the trip and needed to return sitting in business class as per doctor's note. I was more than willing to pay for the upgrade but once we arrived in Beijing for our layover I was told that in order to pay for the upgrade I would have to leave that section of the airport and re-check myself in? I was forced to sit in my pre-booked seat and was told there was nothing anyone could do to help. Worst customer service ever, each staff member was rude with both me and my husband. They even tried to ignore the fact that we were standing right in front of them and pretend that we didn't exist. I will never ever fly with this airline again. Please don't ever fly with Air China.	0
Montreal to Algiers, the worst flight I had. I thought it was Air Canada, but huge differnce between the two. Very tight seats, not enough food, very poor service and  no personal tv - you have to take your own tablet or rent onboard the flight. I did not expect that when I paid. the first and last time ever with them and do not recommand it to any one unless you want to punish someone	0
Terrible customer service. The personnel taking our luggage told us to catch the next flight because she couldn’t place our luggage in the plane. We talked to an agent from Air Canada who then told us to place our luggage in the conveyor that the previous Air Canada personnel said wasn’t allowed. Which is it? Afterwards, another Air Canada employee scolded my tired mother suffering from vertigo to place her empty baggage cart in a hallway - which the other Air Canada employees said also wasn’t allowed. Despicable attitude. Especially toward visible minorities. Not only are your employees somewhat smooth-brained, they are also very rude, lazy, and unhelpful.	0
The worst airline ever. A lot of delays every single time I had a flight with them, very unfriendly crew in checking in. They have changed my seat which I paid extra for it in last minute, I got the seat on Aug and they just put me in a terrible situation by changing my seat in last minute for both flights No explanation at all - like take it or cancel.	0
I was incredibly disappointed in this airline. The seats on this plane were incredibly squished together, small and absolutely not realistic for someone to sit in or get any sleep on a 15 hr flight. I know this is common among most airlines but it felt especially squished together more than I’ve experienced on other international flights. I noticed they added another seat to each row. I remember last time I travelled it was 2 on the window sides and 3 in the middle, I noticed that has changed from 3 on the window sides and 4 or 5 in the middle. Then to make things even worse the food was inedible. I’m not expecting a lobster meal or anything and I eat almost anything but that food was disgusting and also in unusual small portions. So not only couldn’t I sleep, stretch my legs out reasonably (causing cramping and pain) but I also hardly ate for 15 hrs. That is cruel to do to their passengers. And in order to get a situation with decent food and comfortable seating, you have to pay hundreds of dollars more. On my flight home from Auckland to Vancouver, there were two seats in front of me that we’re the first row with extra legroom compared to the other seats. Before take off I asked the stewardess if I could sit in those seats since they were empty and in a very snarky tone he told me that passengers pay extra for those and you have to do that ahead of time. I straight up told him I’ll pay for it and he said it was too late. When I was booking the flight that option was already taken so there is no way I could have booked it before hand. I sat for 15 hrs staring at these seats with reasonable leg room right in front of me for my whole flight and it was infuriating. They wouldn’t even let this poor single mom with a baby sit there. I believe making people live in these conditions on a 15 hr flight is cruel and I hope that Air Canada and other airlines change these elitist and exploitive practices of business.	0
I purchased my ticket more than one month before the departure date. I am flying YUL-LHR on an Air Canada ticket (personal) and LHR-SIN on Singapore Airlines on a ticket purchased my by employer for business. At the check-in, I asked that my check-in luggage be tagged to my final destination (Star Alliance). The check-in clerk said no. He called his manager who also said no. Reason was a change of policy less than a month ago. No prior communication to customers and when I asked to clarify the policy, the clerk said I don’t know. So when I arrived to LHR I have to go through immigration and customs, pick up my luggage and go to the check in counter, security, etc. I will probably missed my connection. What is the point of flying via the same alliance? I am not a fan of Air Canada and I do not recommend it.	0
Delay of more than 12 hours. Rude and unhelpful staff in Moscow lack of any kind of information post service inexistent. On the way back from MAD to BKK first flight got delayed 2.5 hours so when we arrive in SVO connection to BKK had already departed. Instead of giving us a hotel they gave us a boarding pass to Seoul! We arrived to Seoul without any idea of what to do next nobody say anything to us no information. There they gave us a boarding pass to BKK with Korean airlines for 6 hours later. Arrive into Bangkok with more than 12 hours delay they inform us that our bags were still in Moscow. The worst customer service.	0
Xiamen to Beijing. My trip was meant to end in Europe via Beijing, however we were forced to land in an airport near Beijing due to severe thunderstorm in the Chinese capital. We were left speechless at the neighbouring airport without any ground staff changing tickets for me. We were then bused to a small hostel without any Air China members clarifying anything on our connection flight. When we then tried to call Air China  customer hotline, we waited more than 20 mins on the line but no one picked up the phone. Shame on Air China for running such a shoddy service and you should blame your government for restricting air traffic so much in the last few months. None of the flights departed from China was on schedule. Shame on you for making such an international farce.	0
Sydney to Warsaw via Beijing. What a disaster I have not even put foot on the plane and what a joke! The customer service people could barely speak English, we wanted to see if we could change our return date to find that the departure flight had been cancelled- no email notice from them. Lucky we had a reason to call them the original departure was to get us to a wedding for the next day. Eventually we got a departure flight that suited - took two long calls, first call was a disgrace their reaction was that they were doing us a favour by re-organising a new departure date, and at much dearer rate. Just had an operator in Sydney hang up on me as I wanted to confirm that the new departure flight also provided for us the original seating to be advise no and it was against policy despite being given same on booking. There is a certain arrogance about them. Information is confusing and at odds why we now find we are having to call them more than normal. This is the worst service of any airline we have ever seen, surely no private company can survive with this model. Sorry that I have given rating of flight details as review not accepted otherwise.	0
Manila to Los Angeles via Beijing. It was a travel nightmare. We travel for 4 days in total because the flight in Beijing China to LA was delayed for 14 hrs and we missed our connecting flight in LA to Las Vegas. We have to stayed in LA for 2 days before they gave us s flight to Las Vegas. The representative of Air China gave us wrong information about our flight to Las Vegas.  I wrote them a complaint but no answer back. My luggage did not arrive in Manila at the same day so I have to pick up in the airport the next day and found out that 1 of my luggage is broken. Never again will fly Air China it was a very traumatic experience.	0
New York to Edinburgh via Toronto. This was the first time we had flown with Rouge and it will be the last. The first stage of our journey from La Guardia to Toronto was fine, what you would expect from a budget airline. Our almost 7 hour flight from Toronto to Edinburgh however was a different story. We boarded and found that our seats backed on to the toilets and did not recline at all. This was an overnight flight and our nephew travelling with us is 6 ft 2inches tall! Flight was full so no chance of changing seats. We then started to look for the in flight entertainment to find there was none! I checked their magazine to find that if you wanted any entertainment, you had to rent and i-pad from them costing $10 per person or download their app. Not having a tablet with us, I asked the attendant if we could rent these to be told that they are only given a very limited amount and they had none left. We were only a few minutes into the flight! Why on earth would you advertise something you cannot supply? The plane had I am guessing over 200 people on board and I did not see a single person in our cabin renting an i-pad! So there we were, nearly 7 hours of listening to the toilet door banging and toilets flushing all night, asked the attendant about reclining seats to be told that these seats have a 'limited' recline. They were limited all right, they did not move at all! Found the staff to be ok other than one who was curt to the point of rude. We have flown extensively and have never ever had a transatlantic flight with no entertainment available. Terrible airline, I would rather pay more and fly with a company who have a bit of regard for their passengers!	0
Scammed by booking a non-stop flight that actually had a connection: I checked the flight online and booked the ticket through Air Canada's customer service over the phone. Everywhere it was written that it's a direct, non-stop flight flight, both ways. Even the customer service representative did not give us any additional details. After boarding the flight, we found out that the flight actually has a connection through Sao Paolo (GRU) where we needed to get off, pass through airport security and board the aircraft again. The ticket and booking confirmation did not specify any of these details. To our dismay, there were people who would board the plane from those connections and get better seats where we never got the chance to select our seats again. If it were considered a legit connection as it should have been, then we may have been able to select better seats for some parts of the flight. I believe Air Canada did this intentionally to boost their flights ratings on search engines like Google Flight so that their flight shows up above other airlines' flights who actually show a stopover. They can also charge a higher price by claiming this to be a non-stop flight. This is essentially scamming the customers. Horrible food: Their food was also horrible as usual. The chicken sandwich was cold and stale. The food was so bad that on our way back, we actually had dinner at GRU airport. That return flight's food was actually worse. I had to ask for a different menu item because the pancakes were as dry as the Atacama Desert. Narrower seats: Since they cannot reduce the leg space further because then passengers will have to stand throughout the flight, they narrowed the width of the seats to fit at least one more seat in each row in the economy section. It was pretty much impossible to turn on your sides, do anything that required some mobility or even sleep properly. The most difficult exercise was eating. There was no room to keep your hands at the minimum angle required to even use knife and fork properly to cut and eat food. My photos show the evidence. Usually the food tray would have enough space for the meal tray and a cup. However, if you want to keep the meal tray properly, you won't get any space to put the cup and vice versa. Such a shame for a company that's Canada's flagship carrier and has monopoly over flight routes.	0
Horrendous, had so many flights with Air Canada and like all others there are major delays. Delayed 3 hours for an 1 hour 30 minute flight. No apologies, no food, no water and worst of all no discussion with those who had connections or important events to attend. Always a bad experience.	0
In the future I will avoid Aeromexico whenever possible, and I recommend you do the same to avoid headaches. I was set to travel from Mexico City to Tapachula. I had my boarding pass, I went through security. However, when I got to the gate they singled me and a few others out for "weight restriction". My only option was to spend the night in a dingy and dusty hotel, and wake up early to face the Mexico City traffic once again. Then, when returning from Mexico City to New York, there was an earlier flight with extra space but they said I could only board if I paid a fee of $250 - more than the cost of the flight. In conclusion, not worth the headache. The only real way to vote these days is with your dollar, so I will be avoiding Aeromexico in the future	0
Beijing to Hong Kong. I need to express my disappointment with this airline. I understand flights in china are complex and you can't help certain circumstances but the following is definitely Air China responsibility. We board and than the announcement is saying the engine is broken. There are no solutions offered and it is communicated to go back to the gate and get another ticket. To pass immigration again etc. I visit the lounge and ask what will happen next, the staff there is amazingly rude and ask what do you want? I paid an enormous amount of money for the business class seat and get this attitude!	0
Bangkok to New York via Beijing. This has to be by far the worst airline I have ever flown. They provided such poor service that I am taking time out of my day to write this review.On our flight from Bangkok to New York via Beijing there was a 6 hour delay for no reason. When I arrived the customer service was so far from what you expected that it was almost laughable. I had more info on my phone than they did on their computer. They attempted to lie that the flight was only delayed by 2 hours but flightaware was showing that this flight still has not taken off from Beijing. They asked me to fly to Beijing and see what I can work out when I arrived 6 hours late. I had to run to make the 1pm flight that had a 25 min layover in Beijing or would have had to sleep in the airport for a second time. There was never any talk of compensation or just basic customer service for a customer that has paid a huge amount of money. I would strongly suggest you avoid at all costs. Unless you enjoy sleeping in airports and dealing with some of the dumbest customer service representatives.	0
Miami to Toronto. The worst of the worst airlines out there. I stand 6'3" and we specifically asked for emergency exit seats. That is not what I got when we boarded. It was almost impossible for me to sit in those seats.  I will never again fly this sardine can in the sky. My advise to anyone looking to fly Air Canada Rouge,look elsewhere.	0
Nassau to Toronto. I had a very unpleasant experience with Air Canada rouge. On my way back to Canada after a delightful vacation in Nassau, Bahamas, our flight (AC1817) was delayed by 35 minutes which ended up being 1 hour late. This delay resulted in missing my connecting flight from Toronto to Montreal. I was very disappointed by the poor customer service. When we landed in Toronto at 11:52 pm, I was told by a flight attendant that it was likely that our plane departing at 12:30 am would wait for us as we were 15 passagers heading to Montreal or Ottawa. I ran to the baggage carrousel and was then told at 12:15 am by an Air Canada representative that our flight to Montreal was waiting for us. At 12:23 am, the same rep confirmed that the plane was leaving without us. I was then redirected to a customer service office were they gave me and my sister a $20 food coupon to eat at the airport. As the flight that we missed was the last one of the night, I ended up sleeping on the floor at Pearson's airport until 6:00 am (boarding time of my next flight).  I booked my vacations through Air Canada and it was not cheap.  I was expecting a great customer service. The entertainment 'app' wasn't working on our way to Nassau. Very displeased with my whole experience.	0
Unclean Aircraft - Horrible maintenance aircraft washroom. Rude Cabin Crew - Very bad attitude and behavior from the lady cabin crews. I asked for some water to take my medicines and the arrogant female cabin crew started yelling at us. Some who were not females, were well behaved and empathetic. Unfriendly website: Air Canada website is technically faulty and did not allow me to change flight. Dicey and misleading refund options: I opted for a refund. But Air Canada refund policy is not transparent because you pay 0$ cancellation fee but you are not refunding full amount. So hidden deductions but Air Canada will not share with customers.	0
Couldn’t make a flight due to family emergency. I still ended up driving an hour to the airport to see if I can talk to someone regards to just switching the flight. I wasn’t looking for a refund and even though I offered to pay a fee for rebooking I got zero help. I don’t believe that you absolutely cannot change a flight date! The situation was handled with zero care! I called a bunch of customer service numbers and got the same treatment pretty disappointing	0
The check in process for Air Canada is atrocious. You have to do everything yourself, the equipment hardly works. There is no staff to assist you either. I requested assistance via the self luggage check in, after 10 minutes of holding up the line someone came to help. Every single person had an issue with the baggage check in. There was a roped off area nearby with actual people working but we weren’t able to go to them for assistance? Why pay Air Canada prices to do all the work yourself?	0
We originally booked and paid for a direct flight to Barcelona, where we were to board a cruise ship. Air Canada cancelled that flight only 2 days after we paid for it, and bounced us around on at least 3 other non-direct routes, but never offered a refund for the lower priced tickets. This final flight, via Lisbon, had a 75 minute window to connect on Air Portugal flight 2676. About 24 hours prior to departure from Toronto, we received an email announcing that the flight from Toronto to Lisbon would be 45 minutes late leaving Toronto. Once in Lisbon, we found out that Air Portugal had a second flight to Barcelona about 2 hours later. Air Canada should have made that our connecting flight from the very start. With about 2 dozen fellow passengers from the Air Canada flight scrambling to get to Barcelona, that later Air Portugal flight was quickly full. We did not get tickets for that flight. There was absolutely NO Air Canada presence in the Lisbon Airport, and Air Portugal denied any and all responsibility to even assist us. More like “Star Non-Alliance” from our perspective. A Portugal police officer, stationed at the airport, was the only person who gave us assistance during our 17 hours stuck there. With the help of Holland America, we finally got a midnight flight to Malaga Spain and joined the cruise ship two days late. A loss of almost $2,000 for the two of us. Air Canada responded to my detailed inquiry with an unsigned form letter stating that the delay was not their fault. To me, it smacked of arrogance. Check out Air Canada’s FAQs on their web site. Read their definition of how they calculate a mechanical delay at the origin if it happens to subsequently coincide with a weather delay at the destination. It’s all about protecting Air Canada and denying any responsibility. I have long disliked this airline. Customer Service on the admin side is terrible. On the plane, it is not bad. Phone them and you are routinely on hold for an hour plus.	0
Moscow - Hong Kong A330-300. Both flights delayed (40 minutes and almost 2 hours respectively) which might have been a problem if I had transit. The seats are atrocious and some of them were broken. Mine were broken on both flights (headrest wouldn't stay and the tray table was squeaky and uneven). The service is more or less ok quite a lot of smiles although crew disappeared right after the meal for 8 hours. They answered the calls quickly so not really a problem. The meal was mediocre quality hit or miss catering from Hong Kong significantly better than from Moscow. They ran out of meal options on both flights pretty quickly. IFE screen was malfunctioning on both flights although after they restarted it it worked flawlessly. The system is pretty slow but I liked the movie selection. Aeroflot misinformed us twice on the gate we were arriving to which made it hard to greet us at the right terminal. They also decided that the bus is good enough to deliver the huge crowd of 300+ passengers to the terminal. Overall the experience was poor especially because of the seat pitch problem and broken seats. I must say Aeroflot is quite good on short- haul and medium-haul European flights but I would never take a long-haul with them again - the seats the delays and overall service leaves a lot to be desired and the overall feel is Aeroflot doesn't care about its customers at all.	0
Hong Kong to Geneva via Beijing, round trip. Never experienced anything this terrible. Planes are filthy, entertainment system are from dinosaur time. They didn't even bother to put the blanket into a plastic bag! Delays on all four legs of flights, lost my baggage on both ways! The return trip was particularly memorable! Over two hours of delay before take-offin Geneva airport (at the time it was the only flight departing Geneva that was delayed). Naturally missed my connection in Beijing. Ground staff were rude, and the only thing they could do was to change it to another flight 28 hours later! And somehow they could change the flight # without changing the date!! (Found out this problem when checking in, nearly refused to give me a boarding pass. I had to then spend nearly an hour queueing in the ticket office before the problem was finally resolved). When checking in, I repeatedly told the staff to locate and transfer my baggage to the new flight. And then after 28hrs, that flight was further delayed for nearly 4 hours for no reason! And then, when finally landed in Hong Kong, I found my baggage was still in Beijing. Congratulations Air China, you are the absolute worst.	0
New York to Bangkok return via Beijing. Worst airline and customer service I have ever seen. All 3 flights so far have been delayed. They ruined my honeymoon in Thailand with my wife and made me miss all of my business meetings in New York by being delayed over 7 hours for now reason. They claimed it was due to bad weather in Beijing but weather.com showed that it was beautiful weather in Beijing and in Bangkok. Made us sleep in airport without even providing hotel accommodations. We paid $6,000 each for our business class tickets and were treated in the worst way possible. When speaking to the representative they said the best they can do it give me access to the lounge at the airport - which we already had access too since we were business class! Absolutely the worst.	0
Mexico City to Toronto. This is the first time I have been on an Air Canada Rouge flight. I had a round trip from Toronto to Mexico City and it was a terrible downgrade from previous Air Canada service to Mexico City. Air Canada no longer allows 1 free check bag for economy class. This is promoted as an offer to reduce flight cost, even there is no way of making a comparison on price when it is in constant fluctuation, and I definitely paid the same as I have in the past of economy Air Canada price that use to include 1 check bag (and previously a meal as well). The cost of a flight with baggage included was nearly $350 dollars more!  The rouge flight only provides online entertainment that you must use you table, smartphone or laptop, but provides no plug in to charge your device, my laptop ran out after about 2 hours on the flight. This would be a further problem if you are arriving somewhere and need to communicate but have no battery left on your phone!  Air Canada overbooked flight. There were numerous passengers that paid and booked flight but could not board because the flight was show to be overbooked. If you do not check-in online or pay for a seat selection, you are not guaranteed a seat.  As a result I had to wait until 10 minutes before boarding so I could have a seat confirmation, which turned out to be in the back row by the washrooms. I was seated with two other large men. Flight attendants were rude and hit my knee and elbow about 3 times moving their food cart through the aisle -  maybe it was my fault because my knee was tilted the wrong way, but they also knew the three large men stuck in one aisle were very uncomfortably squished into their row. Was one of the worst flights I have taken. I will definitely be changing my preference of giving them my business at the first opportunity.	0
My girlfriend and I changed our booking prior to our flight and we have a reciept saying we should get 100 euros refund as a result of us changing the booking. We have waited 5 months so far and have not received a cent. We have contacted air Canada several times to ask where the money is at. The first time we were told it would arrive shortly. The second time we were thrown around between different people until we got hung up on out of nothing. The third time today I called in and asked where the money was at and now they say my name isn't even the one on the ticket and booking reference I've made. They refuse to receive my boarding pass and receipts which state that the ticket is of course mine. As to the actual experience flying with Air Canada I do not have anything positive to say. Our food was extremely small portions and very bland. I would not recommend buying anything through Air Canada if you can avoid to do so.	0
Just a horrible airline, very bad service, very expensive, old airplanes, dirty and fallen apart seats, rude staff. They need to learn from some airlines like Turkish Airlines, Qatar Airways or even Aeromexico. My last trip with Air Canada was an embarrassment, they charged travelers a 1 cad for earphone and serving water from this dollars store 1.5 litre of water, very embarrassing. I misplaced my credit card and I only had my debit card on me and I wanted to pay for the earphone, the flight attendant handed them to me and proceeded to get the payment but apparently their payment system doesn't accept debit cards, so she told me that my payment wasn't accepted and asked me hand back the earphone. A nice lady behind was a witness to this surrealistic situation and paid for my earphones, I fly at least 3 times a year for many years and I always avoided Air Canada until then, to me its an airline from the stone age.	0
Aeroméxico is an airline that appears to be having serious customer service issues. Aeroméxico has made so many of its' clients "special" Platinum/SkyPriority clients that essentially nobody is anymore. The Platinum line when checking in is often just as long if not longer than the line for non-privileged passengers. They need to control who gets to go into the SkyPriority/Platinum line with a little more discretion since little incentive exists to spend your travel budget on the same airline. This flight had no personal entertainment systems although my flight from Mexico City to San Francisco did have a personal entertainment system in the coach cabin. This plane was a much older aircraft in everything including seat comfort and ergonomics. Food has gotten progressively worse even in the first-class cabin over the last couple of years. They used to be a little more creative in first-class and serve decent wine. The food on my last six flights of which five have been in the first-class cabin has been mediocre at best. My real problem with Aeroméxico and the reason I am giving them a rating of 1 out of 10 is that on two of my last three trips they have lost my luggage. Both times I was flying in the first-class cabin and had those "priority luggage" tags affixed to each suitcase. I have never once seen "priority luggage" come out first either when I land in the USA or in Mexico. I think Aeroméxico should just do away with them because they have absolutely zero utility. Aeroméxico has the worst system for handling lost luggage. They just lie to you and don't answer either phone calls or emails even though the little paper they give you promises that they will respond in three hours to email. The lost luggage group never picks up the phone and when you are by some miracle somehow able to get a hold of someone the only thing they are capable of doing is giving you some kind of false apology.  Part of the problem is that Aeroméxico is not penalized in any way for not delivering lost luggage in a timely manner. They don't compensate passengers even if that passenger doesn't get their luggage in three or four days. They could care less about what you have trapped in the lost luggage and are unable to give you an estimated date or time when you will actually have your luggage. They are even incapable of simply saying if your luggage was found at the airport of origin. The worst part is that they don't care. This has happened to me twice in my last three trips flying first-class! Save your money and fly one of the new budget airlines.	0
Mexico city to Ciudad Juarez, and I'm so disappointed in Aeromexico. First they delayed my flight for 2 hours then after a while they cancelled the flight and they didn't give the reason why. They didn't provide voucher for food or stay and didn't even instruct us as to what to do and when a new flight was going to take us to our destination. When I called the call center they didn't provide good options to reschedule my flight, at the end they put me on a new flight the next day and was also delayed at origin and at connection. Horrible experience and bad service.	0
On June 12 my husband and I were supposed to be on the flight from Hong Kong to Honolulu via Beijing. We had a booked and planned two-week vacation in Hawaii with interisland flights between three Hawai'i islands and booked hotels. At noon, on June 12 we got a phone call from the agent, CTrip, through which we booked our return flight to HNL to tell us that Air China cancelled our flight that evening. Since it was the carrier Air China who cancelled the flight. CTrip could not rebook us on any other flight to HNL even though we explained that we have a hotel reseravtions and rentacar paid for for two week vacation as well as interisland flights and that they are costing us thousands of dollars by this impromptu decision. They were not able to offer anything to us. Neither a rebooking later that evening nor change of air carrier within the Star Allaince. We went to the HKG airport just to receive the same information from Air China ground staff, who were rude, unapproachable, insolent to say the least. The ground staff just gave a terse answer that all Air China flights leaving HKG that day were cancelled due to typhoon, even though all other companies were departing that night, with a bit of dalay but they weren't cancelled, without offering a solution, customer care or showing any compassion and cooperation. The only thing that we got was the refund for the tickets in full and only becuase we had booked throught an agent. At the end, we managed to find a flight that would take us out of HKG to HNL, Korean Air. The plane departed that evening with two hrs delay without a fear of typhoon or endangering its passangers.	0
Johannesburg to Chengdu via Beijing. The flight here was good but the trouble started when I landed. My transfer flight to Chengdu was cancelled and just gave me a later flight - 12 hours later and no one is able to tell me whats happening with the flights and they don't even know if I'm at the right place. Air China has a lounge and I tried to explain my story to them that I'm tired and want to rest there was 2 answers in that 1 question: 1 Sorry we don't speak English and secondly sorry it's for first class flyers only. So here I am as a paying customer sleeping on the floor.	0
Flight was delayed. Changed the time 5 times before it finally departed. The captain was saying different reason as to what the information texted to the passengers.	0
This was our worst experience ever. Air Canada did not do its job well. The flight was just sitting on the runway for an hour at the Toronto airport. When we booked the flight and given the itinerary, it was just a 45 minutes technical stop over at London for which we were not required to offboard the aircraft. It was announced that we need to offboard and there is a lay over of 2.5 hours. We had to go through all the security checkins again. They did not start boarding until 25 minutes and then when we asked, they said it’s delayed for 2.5 hours due to technical issues. Again until 35 minutes before the scheduled time they did not start boarding. The staff at the gate did not have any clues about flight time. So many people missed connecting flight from Mumbai. Our bags did not arrive at Mumbai airport. Overall the whole flight experience was a big mess. Air Canada needs to show a responsible behavior and notify customers in advance if they already have such plans of extended pay over.	0
The absolute worst customer service. Will never fly with Air Canada again. We were going from Vancouver to Toronto and our flight was canceled a few hours before the flight and we were put on another flight 7 hours later, which meant we lost 7 hours of our vacation, 5 of us had taken days off work which we could have worked, by the time we reached rental cars were closed, we didn’t get the hotel rooms we had wanted, and missed some of your planned events for that day as got to the hotel at 5am. I have contacted air Canada several times via calls and email and received 1 computer email giving a percentage off the next flight within 2 years for 4 people (even though we were 5). I have been requesting to speak to a representative for 4 months and still have not heard back.	0
We booked a flight from Terrace CA to Zurich via Vancouver departure on the 17 September and arriving on 18 September. Flight number AC8440 (YXT to YVR) and AC882 (YVR to ZRH). While checking in at the airport in Terrace on 17 September we were told that the flight from Vancouver to Zurich has been canceled without upfront information. This resulted in the situation that we had to travel via Frankfurt to Zurich and arriving 10 hours later in Zurich as originally planned. In addition, we booked Economy Premium Seats for additional costs but were not delivered with Premium Seat class. I reached out to customer care on 17 September 2022 via Air Canada homepage, on customer care hotline on 24 October 2022 and via e-mail to customer care on 25 October 2022. As of today, there is no reaction at all.	0
I travelled from Charlottetown, PEI to Dallas via Montreal. My first experience was pretty good. My return flight was Dallas Fortworth to Charlottetown via Toronto Pearson Airport. My dallas flight experience was good. My troubles started when flight to Charlottetown from Toronto got delayed and later got cancelled. I received a message that my Charlottetown flight got cancelled. To know my options I approached a Air Canada personnel near the gate. That person suggested to contact Customer relations on Level 2 near escalators. I waited in que for 2 hours and want to know my options. One more personnel came to us that Customer relations at that place were overwhelmed and We need to see another customer support team on Level 3 at Toronto Pearson Airport. Me and some other folks came to see Level 3 customer support team as instructed and Customer support team said to us that they are not aware why we are standing in line. Before making this announcement, we waiting in line for almost 1 hour. When it is my turn, I asked the front desk attendant what are my available options as I need to attend work tomorrow. If I get refund, I would like to make a reservation with another carrier. She yelled at me and said that they don't handle refunds and I should email or contact online. I went online where I made my initial reservation and It doesn't give me an option to cancel the flight. Instead it checked me in for another flight on the next day without my approval. In the website, it clearly says "If you are at the airport, see a customer service personnel and they will gladly help with changes". They made me speak with a manager and his advise was that I have only one option. My next flight was more than 12 hours. They didn't offer hotel rooms or food vouchers. Instead they suggested me to reserve a hotel room and they will refund up to $300. They said Air Canada ran out of hotel rooms in big city like Toronto but as a individual I should be able to book room on my own. I should make my own to and fro arrangements from the airport to the hotel room. I felt disappointed for purchasing a expensive ticket with them. They treat their customers like shit and has no respect. If they delay your trip, you should be fine with their decisions even if it means that you can attend your job and lose your pay. Very unprofessional, very rude and pathetic customer service. I will never fly again with them.	0
Orlando to Mexico City, and very bad first class meal service, schedule means hot meal, not a cold croissant, red wine like vinegar, fake champagne. Seats felt very close, leather seats dirty, restrooms not clean, My luggage was damaged, priority handling took more than 20 minutes. At Mexico City Airport a long line for claim damage and the answer: write an email, keep your tags and send photos.	0
Shanghai to Harbin. Our flight unfortunately misconnected at Shanghai Pudong and Qantas rebooked us on an Air China which is two days later. The itenary was confirmed by Qantas staff and was in writing. When we arrived to check in with Air China, the check in staff was printing our boarding when he suddenly then tore up the passes. He then claimed there was a minor technicality with the ticket (the re issued ticket had its validity date set at yesterday instead of today when we were supposed to fly). He refused to offer further assistance and told us to contact the airline ourselves, even though we had no local phone to use. Basically he said that was not his problem. When we tried to seek help from a neighbouring female check in agent, she got up and yelled at us at the top of her voice to "get lost". We are stuck in the airport with no way of getting our flight rescheduled. It is really shocking how Air China can simply dishonour a confirmed itenary by another airline just like this. This experience left my girlfriend absolutely in tears. I am absolutely shocked how Air China's check in staff can treat passengers in such a dehumanising and humiliating manner.	0
This airline lost both my husband and my checked bags and they never made it Iceland! We had to spend about $1,000 USD on clothing in Reykjavik to survive the weather. Then, after we were home they found my husband’s basic black travel bag that was full of stuff he had already replaced. I never got my bag with irreplaceable items.  Air Canada is only allowed to compensate $1,600USD. I got a check finally, 4.5 months later. But honestly I’d rather have my belongings. Never using this airline again.	0
Horrible experience, first paid in advance for our food only to find out none of it was offered and of the 9 choices we had only two were available. Then we had our gate changed across the airport last minute and as it was announced we rushed across the entire airport only to be met with hostile staff at the boarding gate. It was terrifying. Thankful to be on the plane and get back home but will making it a priority to avoid this airline in the future by all means necessary.	0
LHR-SVO-ULN return. I have flown this route 6 times over the last couple of months. This is by far the fastest way to Mongolia from London but am fed up by the last of customer service and inability to transit luggage through SVO. The planes from LHR to SVO are generally new and clean. Onward from Moscow the planes are ancient although the business class seats recline flat. The food is always the same - just about edible in business class. Out of my last 4 journeys my luggage has been lost 3 times. Going to give up with Aeroflot and fly Korean air via Seoul now. Via Moscow might be quick but the total lack of customer service wears very thin after a while.	0
Trip from Rome Fiumicino to Frankfurt. Due to 'technical issues' was forced to return to the airport twice and then rescheduled the following day. Staff were extremely unhelpful during this ordeal. We sought a flight with another airline the following day. Air Berlin have not been helpful since this endeavour in responding to enquiries.	0
Toronto to Fort Lauderdale on 13th March. This flight was bad even for Air Canada. The staff was rude at best, insulting at times and never helpful. We had a 6.40 am flight and were early but eventually were told to board the plane, then told to disembark, then told to reload, then again told to disembark, all by different staff. Evidently communications skills are not a hiring requirement. We were then given some lame excuse about having to use an alternate fueling process which delayed the departure by 3 hours in total. Why this has to be done in the first place is scary and why the problem wasn't detected earlier to minimize the delay reeks of incompetence. After 2 hours they finally loaded us, told us we were fuelled and then delayed the departure for an hour for no specified reason (I suspect we were loaded to shut us up). The result of this was we would miss connecting flights and when we asked how this would be resolved we were told not to worry, an Air Canada customer service representative would meet us at the gate and get things settled and that we would not have a problem. This was either a lie or at best a complete lack of communications as this did not happen, either way unacceptable. On landing we had to track down the Air Canada booth, get a piece of paper to then take to the connecting airline where we found out that we missed out on several flights and that the 4 pm was booked solid. We were given the option of the 8 pm flight or wait until the next day. Since this was March break and we were on a 5 day vacation I didn't think spending it in the airport was a great option so we chose the 8 pm flight. What irked me was that every time we asked a question we were given erroneous (trying to be positive) answers at best. We were advised we could contact customer service which we did who then said all they could do was call in the Manager who we had already discussed this with so no comfort there. We were then advised to contact customer relations. When we did that were told they didn't talk to people and hung up on us when we tried to come up with alternative travel arrangements to avoid having to wait until 8 pm. I think that unless there is an alternative to Air Canada that my future travel plans involve driving, at least I have some control. Everyone else should consider that as well.	0
I am extremely dissatisfied with Air Canada. Besides the flight attendants themselves on the plane, the rest of the experience was awful. It began when my friend accidentally put down my nick name, "Chase" instead of Charles on my boarding pass. When we attempted to change, we ended up having to "upgrade" all 3 tickets for over $3500 and we didn't even get "upgraded" seats. I understand that is an error on our side, but I find it absurd that it cost everyone that much for one name change and  that we couldn't just upgrade one ticket instead of all 3. Also, the agent I spoke with on the phone was very rude, as was his supervisor. After I was told that everything was clear and I was good to go with my flight. I was woken up in the middle of the night (the morning of our flight) and told that I needed to get up and send more documents over. Next, while we were at the airport, the customer service agents at the desk were rude from checking in our bags, to the service desk in the terminal. Our flight was delayed twice (understandable), but when we approached the counter to ask about our connection that we were going to miss, we were told, "go sit down, we have to go on our break right now" and they two agents grabbed their stuff and walked off. We were left not knowing what was going on at the gate because the screen at the gate still read the previous flight's info the entire time we were sitting at the gate.	0
By far the worst airline I have ever flown. 1. Plane was diverted to Winnipeg 2. Agents could not book anyone on new routes for 3+ hours 3. A $20 food voucher was offered for the restaurants that are past security (without a ticket you couldn't eat) 4. Took 4 hours to line up hotel vouchers 5. Rebooked on a later flight, but the class change was not recognized or refunded will never fly Air Canada again.	0
We had a wonderful Aeromexico flight from Los Angeles to Mexico City en route to San Jose, Costa Rica. The plane had a stop in Mexico City for about 2-3hours and we all had to disembark. We went through Mexican airport immigration and we were given forms to fill out, which we did with no problem. We waited for our next flight to get going, but when I was boarding the flight attendent ask me for the immigration piece of paper that was given back to my husband but not to me. No one said that I needed one also, so we assumed it was a family trip immigration paper. Well, the flight attendant was very rude, could speak hardly any English and just told me I could not leave the country of Mexico without it. She told us to go find someone who could speak English. Well, as you can imagine, everyone else is boarding and we are rushing around trying to find an English speaking person. It was just hell! We finally did find another tourist who had the same problem, he directed us to a very angry man who said we had to fill out another immigration card and give him $20.00 U.S. Before I could leave the country. Well this took about an hour. By this time, our dream first class flight to Costa Rica had gone and so had our money which we had paid for it. We went immediately to Aeromexico customer service desk, hoping we could get on the next available flight - they were able to put us on a flight at 8:30 am the next morning but we were charged $1135.00US for 2 people in economy. We tried to explain the situation and circumstances which happened that were beyond our control. But still, we had to pay the amount or we weren't going. No empathy, no trying to help us at all. It was if you want to go you pay what they say. It was the most terrifying trip, landing there in Mexico and then being told you could not leave because you did not have a piece of paper which I was not given back, just my husband was. So much For Business Class experience which we had saved for a long time for. We were stuck at the airport for 15 hours with not one person asking if they could be of assistance. Terrible experience. Not to mention the cost for us to buy another two tickets.	0
Staff unfriendly and impolite they were eating during our conversation at the front desk. I had a flight from London Stansted to Verona they cancelled it without informing me because I booked trough Edreams. I had been waiting for 5 hours at the airport no information displayed no apology and I had to pay the transport from Stansted to Gatwick. I tried to complain with the customer service via email but no reply at all.	0
Bangkok to London via Beijing. Absolutely shocking service from Air China. while the inflight experience is not good, this is nothing in comparison to what I've experienced since leaving the aircraft. First of all my luggage was left behind in Beijing. No big deal - this happens with all airlines. What's terrible is how Air China resolved this, or rather didn't. After chasing them many, many times over email (with up to two weeks passing between replied from their customer service team), they finally agreed to pay me the due compensation of £46. Great, I thought, a resolution. But when the envelope finally arrives through the post, I find it contains not a cheque but a voucher for travel with Air China. As I have NO intention to ever fly Air China again, I find this next to worthless. Reading back through my emails I now find (of course) that Air China did make one very discreet reference to a 'TCV' (or Travel Compensation Voucher). I think it's disgusting that they use a jargon-y acronym to hide their true intentions. The whole experience reeks of complete disregard for the customers that keep their shoddy business afloat and I would recommend that you avoid this airline. (and I could write a whole different complaint about the 5 hours I spent sitting on a badly air-conditioned plane awaiting take-off on the way out).	0
Beijing to Hong Kong. I had such a terrible experience, in that my colleague's gender was listed wrong on her ticket. She's a female, and somehow booking through the agent her gender was listed as male. Air China refused to correct this, and made us cancel the ticket (and pay the cancellation fee) and also purchase a more expensive ticket. Never before have I been so disgusted by incapable customer service representatives who just pass the buck. It was a really soul crushing experience.	0
The one thing that I learned from flying Air China from Washington to Ho Chi Minh City through Beijing and back is that I will never do it again. I have flown IAD to SGN three times before on other airlines but Air China was the worst. The seats were uncomfortable on every flight. The food was mediocre at best  - like something you'd find on a mediocre airline, not the flagship air carrier of one of the largest countries in the world. And don't plan on listening to the hours of music you downloaded to your iPhone because Airplane mode is not good enough for this airline your phone must be turned completely off for the entire flight. And since the flight was late taking off, most people on the flight had a snowball's chance of making their connections in Beijing because of the mess that transitting in Beijing is. But you will have to read about that in a review of PEK. I will not fly Air China ever again. I would rather pay more.	0
Bangkok to LAX via Beijing. Flight from Beijing yesterday to LAX was unbearable. Seats were torture. Maybe I slept 2 hours out of 12. People 7" shorter than I were equally miserable. Larger people were pacing the aisle trying to release leg cramps. Zero room to make yourself even minimally comfortable. Staff had little English and were remote. Also Air China's connecting flight from Bangkok to Beijing was delayed til 4:30 a.m. Miserable and compressed connecting time to something resembling chaos. Over and never again!!	0
A letter I just sent to Air Canada. I think it pretty much summarizes my feelings for them at the moment. ------ Hello, I am still waiting for a status update for this case. We have been now waiting over 90 days for communication from Air Canada. We cannot check the status of our claim because we are now receiving the message "Access to your file is no longer available. Please contact your airline for more information". Please expedite this request. We need to talk somebody in regards to this claim. COVID is no longer an excuse for how poorly Air Canada manages customer luggage. For Air Canada, customer satisfaction now seems like an afterthought, which is why we will likely never fly with Air Canada again.  Even after suffering through this, there have been multiple instances where the customer care members will simply hang up on us, requiring us to sit through it again.	0
I am highly disappointed, frustrated, and traumatized by Air Canada. My flight from Cairo, Egypt to Toronto, Canada was a normal flight. We arrived to Toronto to take another flight to San Francisco. With 10+ hours of flying and only 1 hour to go to our next flight, you can imagine the exhaustion we had. We asked the workers if they can let us surpass the long line but they rudely told us to wait like everyone else. My family and I (which was 8 of us total) got in line. It was our turn to get inspected and we got through somewhat, however we had the concern that our gate was already opening. After the inspection, we had to wait just outside of it where there was a screen to wait for our names to turn green as they were x-raying our luggages to get to the US. With the last minutes of our gate closing, our concern grew and we were starting to panic because our names have not turned green yet. Not one worker helped us get to our gate and it seemed they did not care if we missed our flight. We ended up missing our flight and they told us to get to an air canada desk (which they were not specific about where this was). All of us ran through everywhere to find a desk and the workers were extremely rude and uncooperative about looking for a flight. They finally told us we had to get through the immigration customs, to get to an air canada desk to rebook our flights. We got through the immigration customs and we had to pick up our luggages. We face another issue where we could not find them. We initially thought they were on the flight we missed but fortunately they were just misplaced. We wait 30 minutes for them to give our luggages and once we get them we go to the desk. We get there and we are greeted rudely by an air canada employee where she tells one of my family members in a nasty attitude "where does the line start?!", implying that we should move out of the way so that other customers can be helped. We told her she was being rude and she denied it. Still, we moved out the way. An employee helped rebook our flights but we all had to get separated but at that point we did not care. They gave each one of us a hotel and meal vouchers but not to me  (which at the time i didn't check). So I had to pay for my meal which was $50. The next day we all take our flight but the last 4 of us faced the same issues as the prior situation. We fly to Montreal with no issues, but yet again we had to go through a long line to get inspected and wait in front of a screen to wait for our names to pop up. We had 2 hours for our gate to open so I thought it would be a quick wait since this should not happen for the 2nd time to us! But I was wrong. Before our flight departed, I go up to the desk and tell them why our names has not been called and they tell us they thought we each had 2 luggages but we had 1 each. That was the whole wait up and they had to make sure the system says we are in the clear but through all that we miss our flight while heading to the next long line to immigration. So, we go back and they help us rebook our flight within the next hour and hasten ourselves because we are already traumatized that we will miss our flight for the 3rd time. We get to our gate as they were calling the last of the people to get to the plane. We arrive to San Francisco with a huge relief because we are finally home! But of course, they lose our luggage. But the only good thing is that they returned them to our homes 2 days later.	0
On October 20, 2022, my wife and I arrived at Raleigh Durham Airport (RDU) to take Air Canada flight 8839 to Toronto, connecting to Dubai. I was with a group of about 20. My experience there was the worst I have ever encountered while traveling. There were in fact 5 major problems I encountered trying to get tickets I had already paid for. 1. I tried to check in online the day before but their system wouldn’t let me. I then called Air Canada and was on hold for 4 hours. When someone finally answered, she told be to try again 24 hours before the second flight. That didn’t work either. 2. Since system did not allow me or many others to check in online, I showed up early, at 2:00 pm. They told us we had no tickets, we were not in the system. The same thing happened with another couple we were traveling with. After 20 minutes and several phone calls they said we had tickets. 3. Then they said we had to get an app and fill out a Covid form for Dubai. They had previously told our trip leader this wasn’t necessary, so none of us were prepared. The app worked poorly and I got locked out with the app saying I could only redo in 24 hours. Air Canada then told me they not give me a ticket. I eventually redid the app and change to my wife’s phone number. I later talked to fellow travelers in our group who took a different airline that did not require this app. 4. With a working app, I went again to the counter for my tickets. This time they told me they couldn’t scan my and my wife’s passports. No one else had this problem, and I didn’t have this problem 3 months earlier when flying on Air Canada. They had to call their office and after 40 minutes they manually got it to work. 5. I was so relieved to finally have tickets I didn’t look at where the seats were. We had previously paid $234 for seats that were next to each other. The ones we got on the two flights out were not next to each other, and the one on the flight back was next to each other but middle seats we didn’t order. Air Canada owes me $234 for not giving me the seats I paid for. I don’t want a credit because I am never flying this airline again but I'm sure that's what I'll get. During the leg to Dubai all 3 bathrooms on the of the plane left were out. Also, the movie I was watching was lost after a pilot announcement. This happened to many others too. In Raleigh, there were 3 times I was very worried I would not make it on the plane for a trip I had paid a lot of money for. This was a scarring experience and two weeks later I am still very upset.	0
Morelia to San Francisco via Mexico City on Aeromexico and horrible service. The flight kept getting delayed and no one would answer my questions. Rude and lazy employees. My 6 hour flight turned into a 25 hour flight. Everyone who I met on the same flight was as upset as I was. Never flying with Aeromexico again. I wouldn't recommend them to anyone.	0
Flying with Aeromexcio was the worst flight experience of my life. On my way from Toronto to Mexico my flight was delayed 4 hours and was told that I would not be able to catch my next flight so I was going to stay in a hotel in Mexico overnight. I contacted my family in Colombia to let them know that I would not be arriving that day. Once I got to Mexico they rushed me to catch the next flight instead of staying overnight. I had no way to contact my family in Colombia because they had no internet access and when I told them this they said, "it was not Aeromexico's problem". The lack of concern was appalling and the fact that they changed my plans without notice was extremely inconvenient. On the way back home after my trip I had to unfortunately travel with Aeromexcio again and they left everyone's baggage back at the airport. It's been two days and I still have not received my baggage. If I could I would give this airline negative stars. They are the most inefficient and unorganized airline. 	0
Beijing to Newark in Business class. Overall a terrible airline to fly. The entertainment system was not working, everytime we asked about it they said they would be rebooting the system which only after 5 different attempts and 2 hours later we were able to switch to alternative seats in Business class. The meal service leaves a lot to be desired, for business meal and service it would not even compare to most other airlines economy meals. Flight staff is robotic in their actions which means if you ask them a question that's not a common one they do not know how to respond all they can do is smile since their language is a barrier.	0
Mumbai to Montreal via Beijing. I am extremely sorry that I tried to save few dollars by booking cheaper tickets from Air China. Little did I know that I was trading for a worse flying experience. Even though the flight was originating from Mumbai, it got delayed by 2 hours. After reaching Beijing, we were not allowed to board the connecting flight  yes we were late, but that was not our fault). Due to unnecessary procedures, we missed the next flight also. They refused our luggage as that was stopped before an hour of departure. Subsequently, we managed to board another flight. Too many hassels just to get tickets to subsequent flight. It was tough with not knowing Mandarin. Harrased at the security counter also. Barely made it to the final flight departure. Took 38 hours instead of normal 24 hrs reach Montreal. If you are keen on saving money, be prepared for the delay and hassles at the Beijing airport	0
Toronto to Fort Myers. I travel a lot, both domestically and internationally. I have been on my fair share of planes - all shapes and sizes and ages, but never in my life have I been subjected to such uncomfortable penny-pinching seats as Air Canada Rouge. When teenage girls are behind you and can't be more than 5'7" and are complaining about the severe lack of leg and elbow room, a man like myself at 6'3" is in big trouble. The seats literally do not fit you if you are over 6-feet and barely fit an average person. They are narrow, the seats don't move and myself and a gentlemen across the row (around 6-feet) were limping off the plane having been treated to 3 hours of knees jammed into a too-small space and no ability to put your legs under or at an angle. It is not hyperbole, it is that bad. I'm already fearing my trip back. The profit motive of Air Canada is sickening seeing what they have done to these planes. I will do whatever it takes to avoid Air Canada rouge at all costs in the future. I will pay more for a competitor or gladly connect - seriously, you shouldn't be limping after a flight and cramping up during it at these prices.	0
Chicago to Budapest via Toronto and the worst airline I have flown. Left Chicago to Toronto Pearson 45 minutes late and then 1 hr late departing to Budapest. Limited leg room on plane. On the return we departed from Budapest 4 hours late, and by the time we got to Pearson Toronto, all flights to Chicago were gone. They put us in a hotel till next morning and gave us money to buy a half a dinner. In Budapest they gave us money for a coffee.I will not fly this airline again. George Racher	0
Air Canada is a horrible airline, it seems they have gone extremely down hill. My flight was cancelled 8 hours before take off, they rescheduled through United but with many lay overs and a bad route home. I called (on hold for 2 hours) to ask if there was another option, but there was not. I asked if I could choice my seats as I had paid extreme for my seats on the originally flight but they said no. The customer service over the phone was rude, and no help at all. No refund or Air Canada credit for the inconvenience, I understand stuff happens but maybe me kind when you make a last minute change to your passengers. Recommend anyone else.	0
San Francisco to São Paulo via Mexico City with Aeromexico. At the last minute we were told that we couldn't take our 2nd luggage - last minute after all were done. Manager on duty was rude and careless. I will ever again fly this airline. Unfriendly customer service. I'm writing this review even before we fly out of San Francisco.	0
I booked my flight from Chicago to Geneva via Dublin in December 2015. I occasionally got reminder e-mails from the airline, and two days ago I received a "your trip is in two days" e-mail. Aer Lingus allows you to check in 24 hours before departure, and when i went on last night to check in it told me my returning flight had been cancelled and my connecting outbound flight in Dublin had be changed, creating a 7 hour layover when I originally had an 1h45 one. As soon as we saw this, we tried to call Aer Lingus but their hours of operation were over. We called as soon as possible the next morning, and they confirmed that my flight had been cancelled. They did not notify me of this prior to, and had I not tried to check in online ahead of time I wonder if I would have found out before leaving the US. They told me I could catch a flight from Dublin to Chicago on late in the day on July 30th, but my flight from Geneva to Dublin would still be on the early on the 29th. Hence, I would need to find transportation to and from a hotel. Both of these would not be covered by the airline. Otherwise they suggested booking a return flight through another airline. The only good thing was they offered us either a full refund if we decided to cancel, or half a refund if we decided to book another return flight. We found another round trip all together that leaves tomorrow (thank god) and were able to book that (although it did come with a much heftier price tag, but I would have paid it anyway with transportation and a hotel that extra night in Dublin) All in all, I am incredibly displeased with this airline.	0
San Francisco to Delhi via Beijing. Never travel with Air China. Did not even serve coffee or tea? Extremely rude crew and the ground staff.  Did not have my special meal which I had ordered on line and refused to acknowledge that they received it in spite of my showing them the Air China printout. I had to go hungry as I could not eat the chicken they offered. The entertainment was terrible and they only had 6 movies. Half of the time the entertainment did not work.	0
Manchester to Toronto in August 2016. A dirty plane, rude staff and no entertainment unless you had downloaded their app, or paid as we did $10 each for 2 ipads. Cancelled flight but offered us another one same say with a stopover, so we chose the next day as we had booked a direct flight and wanted a direct flight. Lost a nights accommodation with no refund. We have flown with budget airlines and never been treated or spoken to like this crew did. They offered us 30% discount off further tickets, but we would need buy accommodation etc and this has to be used by this August and no way could we afford to go this year.	0
Seats were too close, leaving my knees jammed into seat in front. No policing of carry-ons, so boarding time was 45 minutes. Departure from Fort Myers to Toronto was 3h 40 m late, due to an issue with the plane in Havana 14 hours prior. Would not even food voucher when asked: the policy is 4 hour delay. Staff just shrugged their shoulders. A similar situation 8 days earlier on the Toronto to Fort Myers leg, 4 hours late in departing. Blamed weather, a battery change in Hamilton, staffing problems, etc. Worst is that no notice was given of delay. Paid $1000 Cdn round trip for each seat, so not exactly cut rate prices.	0
Air Canada rouge just doesn't care. When we flew to Tampa the flight was 1.5 hours late with no explanation and no apology. Coming home we received 4 text messages of delay after delay. Didn't end up flying out until 1am and home at 5am. Booked certain times on purpose, not to fly red eyes. Again no explanation and no apology. My sister flew out today and her flight was delayed over 4 hours. They are never on time. The flight is always freezing and there is no leg room unless you pay extra. Never again.	0
Lisbon to Atlanta via Montreal. Terrible, horrible customer service. Our flight was delayed because of technical problems. Then we get to airport in Canada we have to go thru customs and security again! The workers were only letting certain people skip the line so everyone who was missing their flights were angry and confused why they were not permitted to skip the line. People whose flight left after us were getting to skip the line. We finally had to grab someone and get to the front of line. Then they said your luggage isn't there yet so you cant get on flight you have to wait. Then they didn't tell us when it said it made it thru. Of course our gate was the last gate at the end of everything and we missed our flight. The "customer service agent" rebooked us 4 hour later. No seat together, no we're sorry seat upgrade. Nothing. They said they couldn't even track where our luggage is. Worst customer service ever! Never will fly Air Canada again.	0
Our recent experience on Air Canada is the worst I have had in decades of flying. One should never book on that wretched airline. The problems arose when we were changing planes in Toronto after flying Air Canada from Europe. The flight from to Toronto was a bit late but there was still ample time for us to go through customs and all the other steps and make our connection to go home. But, Air Canada had bumped us from that flight to the same flight the next day. Even though we got to the gate for our flight home in ample time and there were seats on the plane, Air Canada refused to let us on, because, they said, our bags wouldn’t make the connection. (They easily could have made the connection had the airline tried. In fact, it seems that one of our bags did make the connection.) We said that we wanted very much to fly home then and that we’d pick up our bags the next day if they did not make the flight with us. The airline refused, including appeals to various higher ups. So, we had to waste a day at a lousy airport hotel when we needed to be home for medicine, our pet, etc. This was inexcusable. Moreover, we heard others having like awful experiences with this airline (on our flight and on others) while we were in the customer service line and at the hotel. Apparently, this airline bumps people all the time for poor reasons. To top that off, with one exception (the man at the gate to our home airport, who tried to get permission to let us on the plane), the staff was worse than useless. Every step took way longer than it should have and they had no sense of helping the much inconvenienced customers. (The woman who told us we had been bumped when we got off the plane from Rome replied, when I said we needed to get home for medicine and our pet, “the airline doesn’t care”.) Everything was extreme bureaucracy and rigidity and a lack of anything resembling competence or due process.	0
Never going to travel through Air Canada again. They made me pay $34 for my carry on baggage and that’s the bag I always carry when I travel. Never had any issues with any other airline. Most of the people around me had the standard sized carry on baggage which just couldn’t fit in their bag sizer. It was probably their strategy to make more money. The lineups to check in my bag were crazy and the staff was horrible. They were extremely unhelpful and their kiosks were not user friendly at all. Overall, I wouldn’t recommend people to travel by Air Canada especially if you’re getting your flight from Toronto.	0
I thought I had seen everything in Aeromexico, but this airline keeps surprising me. This time we boarded 30 minutes late, they had us 2 hours on the plane without actual notice from the staff that was what happened, while maintenance personnel entered and left the plane several times. And lie after lie from the staff which gave reason for the passengers who wanted to get off the plane, and the staff did not let him down. Finally, after more than 2 hours, the Aeromexico plane took off and we don't know if the plane was broken. Casually Aeromexico has not commanded a satisfaction survey from that flight.	0
Taipei to New York via Beijing. Why you should not fly Air China. The flight from Taipei to New York seems a bit cheaper on the surface but there's a 14 hour layover in Beijing. So you need a hotel for that. Which, with a bit of drama I managed. Don't get the hotel in the terminal, get the one outside. Yes, they don't answer the phone, but it's still a valid if ultra ghetto place to sleep. More seriously when I got to NY I found the lock on my suitcase was broken. Checking I found the following missing an old Windows laptop, clothing, an iPod and iPad. I asked them for compensation but they're diligently stonewalling me with 'this is not the right number', 'you must claim within 7 days'. Even though I've called all the numbers and the emails they've sent me show someone in Air China got their documents emailed back inside the 7 day window. Right now they're just ignoring emails. Another interesting thing they said was 'did it have a lithium ion battery?". The Windows laptop didn't as it happened. The iPod and iPad obviously did. But does that mean they can remove them without compensation? Because it sure seems that way.	0
Worst airline ever for customer service. Our flight was cancelled at the time we should have been boarding. No staff available to help at the gate. We took ourselves back to the Check-In area where a member of staff told us "to sort ourselves out and claim expenses back from Air Canada when we got home". Over three months later we are still waiting for reimbursement for the cost of our hotel and meals and the compensation to which we are entitled to. We cannot speak to anyone and emails are just ignored.	0
They rebooked my connection for no reason. Had to wait 8 hours for a new flight. Staff are extremely unhelpful and rude. One of the worst customer service experiences I've had.	0
Flew with family for a vacation in Portugal leaving late June 2022, returning early July 2022. Original itinerary was round trip from Newark to Lisbon flying via Montreal on Air Canada. On day of departure our flight from Newark to Montreal was cancelled without any notice. We found out when we went to the airport. Initially Air Canada rebooked us on a flight with another airline, but when we went to check in with that airline we were told their flight was already full. Next Air Canada rebooked us to fly to Lisbon via Toronto. We arrived in Toronto but the flight from Toronto to Lisbon was delayed and then cancelled at 1:00 am. Air Canada customer service manager at Toronto announced the cancellation and said we were free to make our own hotel arrangements and that we could submit a claim for reimbursement with Air Canada. Eventually we got to Lisbon the next day. On the return journey, the flight from Lisbon to Montreal arrived close to schedule but delays in the airport meant we missed our flight from Montreal to Newark. Once again, Air Canada announced we could arrange our own hotel room for the overnight delay and submit expenses for reimbursement. Air Canada booked on a flight to Newark the next day with another airline. When we got home, we followed the process on Air Canada's website to request reimbursement and provided all required documentation (flight numbers, receipts, etc.). It took 83 days for Air Canada to respond and inform us that our claim was denied because flight delays and cancellations were due to Covid and safety issues and so did not qualify for compensation. When I responded that we submitted expenses for reimbursement based on airport announcements made by Air Canada at the airport, then came back and reiterated our claim was denied.	0
Amsterdam to Hanoi with a stop in Moscow. Delay in Amsterdam because of overbooking and stranded in Moscow. Now one day later I'm still in Moscow. Aeroflot gave explanation. Together with 10 other people we were guarded to a non visa area in a nearby hotel. We received no communication no new boarding pass and service is lacking. We're not even allowed to leave our hotel room. No sign of Aeroflot within the last 36 hours! The hotel guard explains that lost passengers arrive here every day and that this is very common. The whole service is horrible but the worst part is that really nobody cares! Don't expect any service or any communication. We also didn't received our luggage although it's still here at the airport.	0
Tokyo to Milan via Beijing. Horrible experience, not recommended at all. Maybe worse food ever for an airline (and I fly quite often), on-board entertainment system was half-broken (the movie froze every ten seconds so I couldn't watch anything). Cabin crew are really rude, no smiles no matter what, asking for a glass of water gives you back a annoyed face. Ok, it is quite cheap, but really, give you a favour and choose another airline.	0
Ho Chi Minh to Vancouver via Beijing. Worst airline ever, flew from Ho Chi Minh to Vancouver, my baggage was still in China when I arrive in Vancouver. Air China didn't even bother notifying me or at least let me know what happened to my luggage. It was a hassle to get my luggage back. I called them 10 times, every time waiting 30 min on the phone but no answer. Finally got them back thanks to the help of the staff from Vancouver airport. Its impossible to call Air China office Vancouver from the number they provided. I will never fly with this airline again even their price is the cheapest. You get what you pay for.	0
Barcelona to Vienna with Air China. To begin with I really fly a lot and hold a Platinum status and a Gold status at two different frequent flyer programs. I defenitely know what good service should look like. If there would be 0 stars to rate Air China I would do so. Cabin crew are grumpy and unhelpful. Entertainment system is a joke (if you find a movie in English you still have Chinese Subtitles). The cabin interior has the charm of the industrial seventies and the toilets are dirty right from the start. My second flight with Air China and the second time delayed because we had to wait for obvioulsy important passengers. I will never have another flight with Air China. I pity everyone who has to fly with this airline. You are also not allowed to turn on you mobile phone, not even in flight mode. Haven't had this on an airplane since more than 5 years. I want to say something at least one thing that's positive. I guess it's the food. The food was ok.	0
CDG-ATH-SKG-CDG round trip. What a lovely airline! All flights with very comfortable seat. Cabin crews were very professional and were always present. At CDG our flight was delayed. The purser was very helpful and gave us all information and we didn't miss the connecting flight. air Serbia offers a very good product. Good food good choice of drinks - excellent value for money.	1
I flew from Podgorica Montenegro to Belgrade and than Belgrade to Banja Luka. Even though they were ATR 72 airplanes (rather modest in size) I have to say that I had an extremely pleasant experience. Those ATRs looked very good renewed clean warm and pleasant. Flights were on time and according to the schedule staff were extremely polite and helpful. They looked (at least to me) new and with a lot of energy and enthusiasm. There was a meal served (these are 50 minutes flights i.e. rather short) with beverages and that was very refreshing. Excellent and I would recommend them.	1
Flew BEG-WAW and BEG-AUH. Both flights excellent service crew very professional and polite food excellent interior of the plane fresh and new big improvement! Probably the best service at the moment amongst European carriers.	1
BEG-IST (August 2014) - Boarding at Belgrade airport was on time flight was on time (operated with new Airbus A320) very comfortable for this short relation and I must say nice cabin crew members. Food is basic but still this is a very short flight to expecting more than sandwich cookies and coffee. When we arrived at Istanbul (Ataturk) airport all luggage was there. I can recommend Air Serbia for a flight to Istanbul.	1
Auckland to Christchurch. Flew on this short flight on February 14th. It was a surprisingly spacious aircraft, plenty of leg room, very attentive flight crew and refreshments included. Would highly recommend.	1
Toronto to Cancun. You often hear of negative stories when it comes to airlines despite the fact that they have to manage thousands of travelers in the course of a day with few problems arising. I’d like to share an absolutely great news story that really shows how above and beyond Air Transat was in helping my family out when we were in dire straights and had given up hope. On Friday, January 3rd, my wife, 2 kids, a 9-year-old daughter and 6-year-old son, were supposed to be going to Mexico for a week vacation. We arrived at the airport, went through the self serve check-in terminals to get our baggage tags and then moved on to the luggage drop off. Following luggage drop off, I realized that we were missing our passports and our other travel documents. We became very worried when we couldn’t find them following a scan of the nearby area. We had lost our passports between baggage tag check-in and baggage drop off. A short distance traveled - how could this be possible? I asked several of the Air Transat staff in the area for help. They alerted all staff that if they found something to let us know. They also had a few people search with me around the area. Tracing our steps, we remembered that we had taken off our jackets and packed them in our luggage prior to luggage drop off. Were the documents in our luggage, packed with our jackets? Air Transat employees contacted the gate who worked with the ground crew at retrieving our luggage as we rushed to the gate to open them up praying that our passports were there. We were very close to missing our flight. We opened the luggage, and nothing was there. I decided to leave the family at the gate and go back to the check-in to see if there was any progress. With a very helpful employee that saw me in distress, we checked in all the garbage, under the check-in machines, on the conveyor belts at the check-in station. The passports and documents were gone. And we had missed our flight. At that point, I thanked the staff, realizing that our Mexican holiday needed to be postponed. We got in the car on the way home children crying, and both my wife and I very stressed. We started making plans at rushing to take passport pictures, go to the passport office and pay for expedient service and hoping we can save at least part of our trip. The raw emotions of anger, despair, exhaustion and self-doubt were unbearable. On the way home I received a text from one of the staff. They had found one of the 4 passports. I couldn’t believe it! I then got a call about 10 minutes later. They had found 2 more! They had sent the Airport staff to go and inspect the length of the conveyor belt within the airport where the luggage’s traveled. Even though we had left the airport they didn't stop looking. We got home with fingers crossed. If they could only find the last one the trip may be saved. We got the call. They had found the 4th passport. They had to check every crevice around the conveyor belts which travel for several kilometres within the airport. They actually had to have someone climb into a few tunnel-like areas to get into some sections. We were so grateful and was going to call our travel agent to book us on the next available flight. Air Transat staff said we shouldn’t worry about that. The next flight out was at 4.30 that evening, and they can rebook us on that flight directly with no cost to us. This was the icing on the cake.	1
First time I flew with Air Serbia from Brussels to Athens via Belgrade. Both flights departed late. But the service in Business Class was amazing. The best business class flight in EU-EU flights for sure. There were only 8 business class seats and on the first flight I was alone so the flight attendant was all mine.	1
BEG-ATH JU512 A320. Very professional staff food is ok. We landed on time. I was pleased and will fly Air Serbia from now on.	1
Flew to BEG August 23rd and back to STR on Monday 25th. Flight numbers JU341 and JU344. I've recently been flying Air Serbia from STR to BEG and BEG to STR in business class. Although the outbound flight was the old JAT Boeing 737 it has truly been the greatest business class experience I've enjoyed onboard a European airline. Very friendly supportive and attentive cabin crew. On the A319 spacious and comfortable new business class seats (only two rows in the front section so a very private atmosphere). Very tasty F&B (especially the chocolate cake). Last but not least a service of drink refills without any demand from the passengers with a good offering of elegant Serbian wines. I truly recommend this airline!	1
Short flight on a brand new two and a half week old airplane. Air France delivered great service as expected. Check in at Charles de Gaulle was quick and friendly, but the terminal was pretty full once we got to security. Boarding was very fast on this full flight. I ended up falling asleep so didn’t get a snack but when I woke up I was offered two bottle of wine by the crew. Upon landing in Madrid I was able to take a picture of the cockpit. Very nice plane with a brand new smell and friendly crew.	1
Toronto to Rome. I found Air Transat to be a great airline. The airplane was nice with purple lighting after everyone settled down. The seat space was comfortable. The staff were excellent. I required extra help and they were efficient, kind and discreet. Keep up the great work. I will fly Air Transat again.	1
Gatwick to Toronto. Was served a meal with drinks and then half hour again drinks from the cart then another hour after that Hot snacks with bar drinks and finally sweets before landing. The crew were so genuine and smiled. They were so tolerant with this kid who was always in their way.	1
I flew with Air Serbia from Podgorica to Belgrade and from Belgrade to Frankfurt and can recommend it! The staff were very helpful and polite and spoke very good English. The food was good and pillows were provided - a very nice add-on to make any trip more enjoyable. The landing in Frankfurt was fantastic. A very pleasant experience indeed!	1
We recently flew Paris-Belgrade and Belgrade-Paris. It was refreshing to see standards of aircraft interior staff training and general comfort lifted considerably. On both occasions we travelled in business class enjoying perks like comfortable seats delicious meals and excellent service provided by polite flight attendants. I paid for inflight entertainment was provided and together with constant care from flight attendants flight was enjoyable.	1
Flew Air France for the first time on Thanksgiving Day for a quick trip to Europe. Check in was a breeze since the flight was only had full, once we boarded they’re was a blanket, pillow and headphones on each seat. Most passengers had their own row, which was great since it was an overnight flight and sleep was needed. Service onboard was fantastic, tasty dinner with champagne and wine, snacks in the back for mid flight and prior to landing a small baggie with a quick breakfast was offered. Inflight entertainment had a very good choice of movies and music to pass the time along.	1
London to Toronto. My love affair with Air Transat continues. Clean plane, great cabin service for a full flight, reasonably comfortable seats, really good entertainment system, pretty good airline food and great price. Flight was 15 minutes late leaving a congested Gatwick and arrived 15 minutes late in Toronto. I have flown Air Transat many times to various destinations and have never had a problem.	1
Toronto to Gatwick. Cannot say enough good things. Easy check in, on time flight, clean aircraft, super crew and incredible price. Food was really good for a discount airline meal.	1
I flew with Air Serbia in June from Abu Dhabi to Belgrade and from Sarajevo to Belgrade. Nice young friendly cabin crew excellent catering and flying with Serbian people you don't need better entertainment. Both flights were on time with wonderful landing from Sarajevo to Belgrade turning around Avala mountain.	1
BEG-LHR and LHR-BEG flights. I was very pleased. Flight attendants were very kind food was really good flight departed and landed on time baggage came on time. You can see that they have improved food - a lot of great desserts hot drinks refills and a three-course meal. New Aircraft's (Airbus 319 and 320) have nice exterior they aren't noisy at all and magazines were also provided. Really good experience indeed.	1
AUH-BEG-LHR. AUH-BEG portion: relatively new plane A319 great food with a local flare (I asked for a lactose-free meal and it was better than expected) comfortable seats FAs super pleasant; great service. BEG-LHR portion: older 737 but totally ok. Great service courteous staff nice meal. Very pleasantly surprised by both flights. Thumbs up!	1
Calgary to London Gatwick. I flew with Air Transat on a long eight-hour flight, some of which was during the night. They had comfortable mood lighting but when it was dark out they dimmed the lights. They came around frequently with drinks and food and their duty-free selection. I thoroughly recommend this airline if you are flying transatlantic from Europe. I am looking forward to flying on them again.	1
Used Air Serbia twice once from Stuttgart to Belgrade in February 2014 and once Belgrade to Copenhagen March 2014. Excellent experience. Stuttgart - Belgrade was done by old Bulgarian Boeing but you could still "feel" the difference by newspapers meals and drinks and much younger crew. BEG-Copenhagen was great new Airbus excellent meal and coffee plus great desserts. I will use them again.	1
I really appreciated the Air France. They were punctual, the flight attendants were amazing, polite & humble. Respond when needed. The food was good & the announcement was clear. When I was using online check in to get boarding pass, it was really perfect & I could easily use the check in & the boarding pass process with my cellphone, so there was no need of looking or searching for a laptop in the hotel where I stayed. I really recommend Air France for travel.	1
I've flown with JAT (what Air Serbia used to be called). It was a very basic experience to put it mildly. I was flying from London Heathrow to Belgrade yesterday. A great experience there are some bugs to iron out but this isn't first class it's biz class. Firstly the seats were new - they reclined back and the foot part lifted up. You got a big pillow for your back or head and a blanket. We had two stewardesses between 6 of us but I think that is because one of them was training the other. Both women were very friendly and attentive and offered refills throughout the 2hrs 45min flight. The food. Well anyone who has flown with JAT will know the food was something you literally did not bother with. It was sub par. Now I had a 3 course meal with a choice of wines and champagne (or local Serbian brandy if I wanted). The meal was delicious - it was well presented and hot and not overcooked. It was served with fresh bread rolls. I am fussy with things and I couldn't fault it. The cabin was clean. The cutlery was metal. I was offered an iPad but I had my own tablet to watch a film on. A very positive experience indeed.	1
Travelled BEG to AMS and return in January/February 2014. Professional crew comfortable seats with nice pillows on every seat. The food was delicious. Excellent experience.	1
JU 311 12 Dec and JU 314 to Paris on 15 Dec. Friendly and professional crew very comfortable seats plenty of leg room stylish pillows and blankets excellent selection of wine and drinks and delicious meal. When the flight attendant handed me the menu I thought there must be a fee attached. I got a hot meal free. Excellent experience. On a way back was the same. I came to Belgrade airport ground support staff were smiling professional and accommodating. On the flight back the same good service and experience. Have just bought another ticket with Air Serbia to Thessaloniki!	1
Initially I flew with JAT Airways back in September from SKG to BEG with an extremely noisy turboprop aircraft. Either due to long service or due to bad maintenance it felt bad and the service was mediocre having two stewards with basic English and average catering. On January 11 I boarded JU523 again from SKG to BEG. I boarded an Emirates leased A319 with Air Serbia livery and had four very kind stewards. I found small pillows in Air Serbia brand on the seats and overall a huge boost in standards. I asked for a seat change due to a knee problem I had for the seats right at the emergency exit corridor and was immediately granted one. The catering from two small cupcakes in foil had changed into a paperbag with a 0.25l water bottle a paper cup and a packed sandwich with options for only cheese cheese and ham or cheese and turkey plus the trolley with the bar. Given the fact that the flight takes slightly over an hour those are excellent choices. Only minor point is the training of the personnel into the new status of the airline calling once "Welcome onboard JAT Airways flight" and once "Thank you for choosing Air Serbia flight" Overall the impression I got was as if I was in a star alliance equivalent member airline.	1
Los Angeles to Melbourne via Auckland. My wife and I were travelling to attend a medical science conference from Toronto and we chose to travel with Air New Zealand because of reasonably good reviews and some feedback from friends. This was the first time we have travelled in Air New Zealand. I was very impressed by the service and the quality of the aircraft. It is understood that the economy seats would be not as comfortable as premium economy or business class as in any airline, but they were acceptable. Each seat has a power outlet which allowed me to do some work during the long flight. The entertainment was good and the screens were good quality. The availability of free wifi through the long flight was a bonus and appreciated.  The food was of good quality.  The flight attendants were friendly and appeared to enjoy their work and were genuine in their interactions. I was very impressed by Air New Zealand, and I will certainly fly again. Thank you for a long but enjoyable trip.	1
Flew JU656 BEG-SVO on 8/1/14. Departure on time. 100% full even though SU had a flight leaving some 20-30 minutes prior to ours. Catering in business was fantastic worth trying "home-made meatballs and stuffed peppers" and Serbian made Chardonnay! Purser and cabin staff very communicative and pleasant. Overall great flight and product even for a red-eye.	1
Travelled to Belgrade on 9th November YU 381 and returned to London on 16th November YU380. What a pleasant surprise. Food was very good and for a change it was served with proper cutlery!	1
I would like to appreciate the ground staff of Air India working at Delhi airport. Sitender from Air India security and Pooja morning shift for going above and beyond to help my mother in law for assisting her to board a flight to Australia. The attention to detail provided by them was impressive and their customer service skills are excellent. They both are the fine ambassadors for Air India. Keep up the good work guys	1
An excellent journey with a hard working and attentive crew. Food was superb and as if out of a kitchen rather than the standard aircraft pre heated meals. Very well prepared with a great selection of drinks. Worth every cent spent. Nice film and music selection. It was a nice trip throughout to destination. My thanks to the crew for their hard work and bringing fun back to flying.	1
I was very impressed with the way the Air France staff handled everything, from my departure in Barcelona to landing in Mumbai. We experienced bad luck with the weather, we were going to land in Mumbai before time but there was a storm and we had to divert to Bangalore and refuel before we could head to Mumbai when the weather got better. Overall the experience was so bad, but you could not get frustrated at the airline because they were so understanding and reassuring. While we had an additional 5 hours of just sitting around and waiting, they had to do extra hours of very hard work dealing with frustrated passengers! Just wanted to leave a positive review for how polite the flight attendants were, how much they smiled and looked after me!	1
Gold Coast to Christchurch. Amazing IFE, so new and fresh. Plush leather seats were nice. Wifi Connectivity was great on this flight. Hopefully, more aircraft have wifi like this. The Cabin crew were nice, pilots were really nice and let me look around the cockpit.	1
I booked flights for my family on this route. We had a further connection from Chicago to Akron. The woman at the desk at the Gold Coast was so helpful and friendly in getting us sorted and informed on how to get our bags all the way to Akron (we had to recheck them when we landed in Chicago, which we weren't told by our booking agent). Staff on the flights, particularly the long haul from Auckland to Chicago, were fantastic. They did everything to be of assistance to us - my wife is pregnant and we were traveling with our 6 month old too.	1
Hong Kong to Auckland. Premium Economy was exactly what it said and more. The separate cabin was well set out, leg rests were adjustable and allowed almost complete lieback. There was plenty of leg room between the seats . The staff were attentive. An icon on the screen allowed one to call a staff member at any time. Extra drinks were available. The on-screen entertainment was varied and meals were excellent. For breakfast before landing we were offered fruit salad and cereals plus youghurt, crackers and cheese, and a main course. I chose the omelette with potatoes and mushrooms and tomato.  I could not fault any of the service from ground staff through to airline staff.	1
After reading negative reviews, we were dreading our first ever flights to and from Puerto Vallarta with Air Transat. We were very pleased to find out that our experience was completely positive. The check-in desk staff and flight attendants were helpful and cheerful, our seats were normal economy size and we had plenty of legroom. Movies were played on both flights. We were given complimentary drinks and the food for purchase was delicious. We had no delays or other problems and wouldn't hesitate to fly with Air Transat again.	1
My wife and I had plans to visit in March and April 2020. Do to Covid19, we rebooked our trip to August 17, 2020. Recently there was some mix up and our new reservation disappeared. We contacted Air France USA and they offered to reinstate the reservation or issue a voucher. Due to the uncertainty caused by Covid19, we decided to have the voucher issued. The person that assisted us was very helpful and made the experience easy. We are looking forward to visiting France in 2021 when things are more settled. We would like to thank Air France USA for the excellent service they provided. This experience and the service we received during our last flights on Air France, make Air France our first choice of airline.	1
Los Angeles to London. The best airline I've flown. Super comfortable seat, and I'm 6'2. Best food I've had on a plan.. Free, fast wifi- I could watch Netflix. IFE was pretty good. Crew could've been a bit more friendly. .	1
Return flight with our proud flag national airline, beautiful all black silver fern aircraft. Clean and tidy. Flight attendants are very professional and friendly. Departed on time and landed a bit early for both legs. Pilot was able to broadcast a lot of information while in the air to keep us informed such as where we were, what's under and what is the height and temperature et.. Short haul flight with beverage provided, classic cookie time and a cup of hot tea/coffee to keep us warm. Overall perfect.	1
I had a fantastic experience with Air New Zealand, flying from Los Angeles to London and back a week later. I needed special assistance with a wheelchair and right from Check-In Air NZ was on top of it. Assistance was provided directly at Check-In, I was brought to the Business Class Lounge and picked up on time before boarding the plane. Bonny C. from Customer Relations took exceptional care of me, made me feel welcomed and made sure I had everything I needed. Bonny even went out of her way and got me a Fast-Pass for my connecting flight in London because my layover was gonna be really short and Heathrow airport is gigantic. In fact - without Bonny's foresight regarding my short layover I would have missed my connection. The flight to London and back was very pleasant. The crew on both flights was incredibly attentive, upbeat, friendly and professional. The food was very good. The plane was nice and clean. I very much appreciated the great service and would fly Air New Zealand anytime again.	1
I just got off the phone with Air Transat in Montreal and had to immediately write a review for the outstanding customer service I had been given. I had booked a flight for June from Calgary to London for my mom, however, due to circumstances, my mom was not able to go anymore. I had called Air Transat very unhappy and upset and asked if there was anyway I could get a refund for the flight as it was a lot of money for our sisters being students. I talked to the agent and asked if there was anyway I could get a refund or a little bit back. She was so patient and so so kind, she talked to the supervisor, and when she came back on the call and told me the good news, and that I was approved to get a refund on my ticket. I could not believe the sympathy and compassion they gave me and understood the situation I was in. Thank you so much.	1
This was my first time flying Air India after its acquisition by its founding owners Tatas and to be honest I was'nt expecting much of a change in the hard product given the turnaround of the interiors, etc would take time and I would give them at least a year to refurbish their entire fleet and replace older planes with newer ones. However, I did expect to see changes in the Soft Product like Ground staff, Cabin Crew, Inflight meals and most Importantly the On Time Performance. I was very impressed with the overall time management of the ground staff who ensured on time boarding. The Cabin crew was courteous and ensured that all the pax wore masks for the entire duration of the flight. Air India offers free refreshments or meals on a short 60 Minute flight like this one so I was served a refreshment box with a veg puff, tetra juice pack, Tomato ketchup and and the crew was kind enough to serve me another snack box when I requested. Overall it was a great short flight and would fly them again.	1
Flight Attendants made my trip thoroughly enjoyable. They greeted me by name and I was attended to well. The inflight meal was just the right size and very tasty. Was asked frequently if I wanted a drink, and water was available at short notice. I was able to spread myself across part of the seat beside me as well, which was great, as my original seat had three of us side by side in an exit row. I was moved back one row. The plane was delayed for a little while as we had delayed connecting flight passengers to wait for. We arrived in Perth a little late, but had made up some time during the flight. The cabin staff were all friendly, well presented and happy to assist. This was my first overseas flight for 28 years and I enjoyed the flight immensely.	1
Gatwick to Toronto. This was the best flight of my life. The staff were phenomenal and the pilot kept the passenger informed about the delay (there was a two hour delay but the flight quality made up for it). The flight attendants were so kind and helpful. There was also complementary drinks and a meal and snacks. All of which were delicious. The staff also helped passengers move to seat where they might be more comfortable after departure. Because if this, I was able to spend the flight in an aisle seat where there wasn’t someone next to me, rather then in a middle seat squished between two strangers.	1
Toronto to Puerto Plata. I’m so impressed with this airline. We booked a vacation package and everything from boarding to flying to airport transfer to hotel choice was a five star experience.  We experienced expected delays but even arrived within a half hour of expected landing times despite a horrific snow storm in Toronto. Every other airline cancelled or had six hour plus delays. Our flight attendant were very friendly, efficient and helpful both during departure and arrival flights from Canada. Also pleased with the leg room on the flight. Would definitely recommend air transat packages. Keep up the exceptional service!	1
Paris to Madrid. I was suffering a stong migrane at Paris airport. Luckily I had the chance to count on the help of a magnificent Air France member who made sure I got inside the plane and he took care of my hand luggage and talked to the cabin crew so I was carefully looked after during the flight. I cannot be more thankful to the whole Air France team .	1
Paris to New York JFK. I sincerely wanted to thank the crew of flight AF 022 for their kindness and their very kind service. When I asked for information about the flight, they responded quickly and efficiently. The staff were smiling and kind, rarely encountered on other flights. I was touched by the certificate of the entire Air France team signed by the cabin manager Sebastien and the two lucky stones from Madagascar. Thank you very much for a wonderful flight! Je tenais sincerement a remercier l`equipage du vol AF 022 pour sa gentillesse et leur service tres aimable. Quand j`ai demande des renseignements sur le vol, ils ont repondu rapidement et avec efficacite. Le personnel etait souriant et gentil, rarement rencontre dans les autres vols. J`ai ete touchée par le certificat de toute l`equipe Air France signee par le chef de cabine Sebastien et les deux pierres porte bonheur de Madagascar. Merci beaucoup pour un merveilleux vol! Irene Damm	1
I was impressed with the legspace even on this small aircraft. Though Air India usually offers snacks on even short flights but due to covid it was not available on this flight. Water bottles were served to all passengers. Flight was on time and landed a few minutes before arrival time. Overall a good experience on this short sector and thankful to air India for being the only airline to be operating on this route and that too at a reasonable price.	1
Dubai to Paris. I was not given the option to reserve my seat, now I'm stuck in the middle seat with no room to breathe. I would definitely rate this flight zero stars. Never had this issue with Delta or Emirates.	1
Bologna to Johannesburg via Paris. The staff of air France are the most compassionate people I've dealt with on an aircraft. They are focused on Customer comfort. I will recommend Air France.	1
We had a very entertaining flight across to Auckland. The pilot was quite a comedian and had us all laughing. I also like Air New Zealands safety video, it is also quite entertaining and worth watching. I couldn't fault any of their service, on the ground or in the air.	1
We flew club class from Toronto to Montreal and were supposed to catch an 11:15 connecting flight (also Air Transat) to Porto, Portugal. Upon arrival at Trudeau we were informed the flight was cancelled and were immediately taken to see a representative. We were put up at the Marriott at Trudeau for the night, given a $200 travel voucher each and a card to claim any expenses from our stay at Trudeau. We were also given food vouchers. All of this without needing to ask. They simply offered it. We were also re-booked for the next day at 16:00. So the next day came and we left the hotel at noon. We went to check in and found out the flight was delayed until 19:50 and that it would be an A340-300. The clerk at the counter wouldn't come out and say it when I inquired which was a little bit of a sore spot for me but we later found out it was Hi-Fly thanks to some sleuthing on Flight Radar 24. For the record, Hi-Fly did an amazing job as a sub for our later flight. As for the flight itself from Toronto to Montreal, it was excellent. I'm a very nervous flyer and even I was impressed. Pilot was excellent and the crew were polite and attentive. Obviously being a short flight we didn't get a ton of things as our amenities kit would be handed out on our later trans-Atlantic flight. We were however given our ear buds (pretty good sound quality too) and a bottle of water. About 20 minutes after takeoff we were served our cheese plate which was actually quite good. It also came with crackers which themselves were good. Airline food is tough to pull off to begin with but I really feel like Transat did a great job. Flying club class was a treat as being a bigger guy (6'2 280 lbs.) with broad shoulders, I was pleasantly surprised at the fact I could sit with my arms at my sides and not touch my fiancee. Given it also cost less than a flex economy fair on Air Canada for two people it was more than worth it. I'm still giving them a 10/10 because while the delays were irksome and technically maintenance related, I like the fact that they played it safe and cancelled the flight and I also give them full credit for handling it so professionally and making it a much easier experience. I know too many people who've had to fight airlines for things they screwed up. Transat owned the issue and did all they could to correct it. I'd fly them again in a heartbeat.	1
It was a short one hour flight and despite having not web checked in the check in officials were prompt to help me with the kiosk machine as I didnt know how to use them. One of the most impressive thing about Air India is their 25Kg Luggage allowance. The flight was on time and landed before scheduled arrival time though there was no meal service, the crew distributed water bottles and Safety kits. The IFE was working well but due to short course of flight I just had the flight tracker on. Overall a wonderful experience.	1
On 08/10/2021 I had a flight on AirIndia from Mumbai to Hyderabad Before the beginning of the flight itself I was feeling tired hyperventilating and was sick. The air steward came to help and assisted me cleaning up. He offered me and the nearby passenger change in seats. Throughout the journey this steward gave me company whilst doing his duties. He made me drink water every half an hour and offered me biscuits. At the end of the trip he made sure I was all okay.	1
I am writing to heap praise on the wonderful flight attendants who took such wonderful care of us on a recent flight to Tel Aviv from Montreal on Air Transat! It was an incredibly smooth flight on a beautiful new plane! The flight attendants went above & beyond to make us feel comfortable, happy and appreciated, and really knew how to take care of passengers in the right way, as they were smiling from the minute we got on the plane, to the minute we got off. All this to say, it was a great way to start our fantastic trip to Israel, and it helped make it a very memorable vacation. You can be sure we will be flying with Air Transat in the future. The price was also affordable, and the in-flight entertainment up to par. An overall great experience and they deserve high marks!	1
Porto to Montreal. I was diagnosed with shingles while on holiday in Portugal. It was a nasty case with a lot of pain. Our insurance company recommended a quick return to Canada. We had to cancel our flights out of Lisbon and find a way home from Porto. Due to the nature of the disease I only had about an 8 hour window when I was relatively pain free. The pain medications I had would only last an hour or two. I wasn't keen being trapped on a trans-Atlantic flight for 6 or 7 hours. We found one flight out of Porto to Montreal that left Porto at noon which was optimal. It was on an Air Transat A330. I couldn't afford any delays. Check in was quick and easy, the flight was right on time. The aircraft loaded quickly and fortunately for me it was not overly crowded and there was room to stretch out. We found the seats comfortable and food and beverage service was great. After 2 movies I felt confident I was going to make it without a pain attack. We landed in Montreal on time and after a long walk we ended up at the customs area with 500 other passengers. My pain free window was closing quickly. Our nexus cards worked like a charm and we were through to the baggage area in 5 minutes. Priority baggage stickers also worked and our luggage was out first. Hopped on a shuttle to an airport hotel. Rested for a day before we caught another flight to Edmonton. Ended up in the hospital when we got home. Now on the right meds and pain free. Please get the new shingles vaccine before you head overseas.	1
I have nothing but good things to say about both flights we took with Air Transat in May 2018 flying from Vancouver to London Gatwick. Flight personnel were very helpful and pleasant with all passenger interactions (that I witnessed), leg room was good, in-flight entertainment was great and meals, well, meals were airplane food, but at least there were meals! Also felt we got good value for our money.	1
Overnight flight from Paris to Tokyo. Departure and arrival were punctual. Boeing 777 with what I believed to be the latest seating. The seat was well-designed giving me a fair amount of privacy. Food, wine and IFE choice were excellent. The FAs were very friendly and attentive (some might have found them too friendly but I appreciated it). Overall a perfect flight. I could not fault it in any way.	1
Bogotá to Paris. Air France business class is excellent! I flew from Bogotá to Paris, flight attendants were very attentive, friendly and professional. The full flat bed seats are very comfortable, I slept almost during the entire flight. Food was good (food is amazing when flying from Paris). The Inflight entertainment is great, many movies (old and recents ones) Totally enjoy flying with Air France.	1
First time flying on the Dreamliner and also first time with Air New Zealand in over ten years. Boarding got under way smartly and was well organised for the 00.10 departure. Lovely welcome upon boarding and nice mood lighting in the cabin. My daughter and I were seated on the side and ended up with three seats that configure into the skycouch, was pretty good and it offered us extra room. The crew in our cabin were second to none, they treated us like we were old friends, so warm, kind and genuine. The meal was excellent and plentiful accompanied by a lovely Kiwi glass of Fizz followed by a Shiraz. Entertainment was good although I didn't watch much as I was lucky enough to get a decent sleep. Two hours out of Singapore breakfast was served and offered another glass of Fizz, great memory! We landed ahead of time and that capped off a great flight, best I'd had in ages. My sincere thanks and appreciation to the excellent crew, these guys are keepers!	1
Auckland to Adelaide return. When we first walked into Adelaide airport the airport had 2 staff in the entrance and I went over and asked them nicely if they would be able to get me a wheelchair for my mum who was clearly having difficulty walking. They said you’ll have to go to air New Zealand part and they’ll help you. I was horrified with their service. Really very cruel if you saw how my mum struggled to walk. I saw and was told by my mum and sister how wonderful the staff were from the time I walked in with my mum at Adelaide airport to the air New Zealand booking part. till the time they arrived back in Nz where staff continued to help them all the way through. As soon as I arrived at the air Nz check point one of the staff came out from behind the counter. She got a wheelchair she helped label their bags. She arranged everything for us She was on the phone letting other staff know that you had a customer that required help. She arranged other staff to pick mum up on the other side.  Anyone once we checked our bags through we waited where this lady had arranged a pick up point and 2 lovely woman arrived so calm and so patiently waited while we said our goodbyes. Don’t even know if I thanked them cause I’m not good with goodbyes but I hope I did. They even pushed my mum along side my sister. They collected them from different points and got them on and off the plane. From a distance as they wheeled mum They even cared enough to turn mum back around to wave to us as they left. I just can’t tell you how beautiful the staff were to my mum and sister. Thank you so... much for caring for them so well and with such care. I just want to thank them so very much for helping my sister and caring for my mum.	1
I don't normally fly with Air New Zealand. However, today I completed two sectors on Air New Zealand (NZ102 and NZ101). The first sector I did in economy in a B787-9 and the second in Business class in a B777. I can't speak highly enough of the professionalism and service of Air New Zealand. Absolutely everything was well done. The lounge is beautiful and comfortable with plenty of well prepared high quality and tasty food (some of it prepared by chef right in front of you!). On the first sector I travelled in seat 37C on a 'works' economy ticket. The seat was comfortable, adequate leg room (I'm 178 tall and 90kg male) and the lunch served was a choice of osso bucco with mash and green beans, or cold roasted chicken breast salad (which was excellent!) followed by brownie and ice cream, yum! On the second sector, I was in seat 2A business premium. The seats are angled slightly away from the windows in such a way to give full aisle access from all seats, yet quite good privacy. They are wider than many business seats. Breakfast was amazing, a choice too wide to list but listen to this, fried eggs and bacon on an aeroplane? Really good stuff that I've not seen on any other! Coupled with the second-best inflight entertainment I've experienced (second to ICE), an excellent airline!	1
Having flown with this airline for quite some time, it is for the first time I feel compelled to write a review which is essentially to highlight the zeal and enthusiasm of two Air India staff. Ruwan at the ticketing counter and Rohit at the boarding gate, had sparkle in their eyes, spring in their steps and an infectious smile while attending to all sorts of queries of passengers yet not letting the guard down in these Covid challenging times. There pro customers behaviour and keenness to take that extra step for our satisfaction and making us comfortable is praiseworthy.	1
My original Air France flight was Brussels to Lyon. After it was cancelled Air France reacted very rapidly to offer me alternatives. After 30 minutes everything was set. Very friendly and professional customer service. Flight Paris to Lyon was perfect. Very friendly crew. Departed on time and arrived earlier. Fantastic job all the way.	1
I flew from Paris Charles de Gaulle to Panama City on economy with Air France. Very enjoyable flight. The aircraft was new, comfortable seat with a quiet large entertainment screen with many movies and music albums. The food was good and the flight attendants were polite and professional.	1
Invercargill to Whangarei via Christchurch / Auckland. Air New Zealand was excellent, The only thing was I was lucky to make a connecting flight due to the time space between getting off one aircraft onto the other one I had to rush.	1
London to Los Angeles return in November 2015. The staff were friendly and helpful. The legroom was good (not great, but who has great legroom economy these days?) I am 6'4" (195 cm) and felt pretty comfortable. The entertainment system was awesome with lots of movies and shows to choose from. The real kicker with Air New Zealand is that you can order drinks and snacks throughout your flight after the main meal.	1
Bengaluru to Kolkata. The flight was relatively sparse and check in was a breeze although at Bangalore airport the safety checks were at a higher level and the fares were quite reasonable which was good. The flight was on time and boarding started well in advance. The only thing that was an issue was the screen guards which were provided. I could not see anything with them on which didn't make sense because just a couple of months earlier, the screen guards were proper. So it must have been an exception. Landing also happened well ahead of schedule. At a time when all private carriers are trying to profit from this situation, Air India seems to be flying reliably during these times. Keep up the good work.	1
Delhi to Bengaluru. The load factor was quite full. Departure and arrival was on time and the crew were active to ensure that passengers follow the rules and norms during this time. Again there was no food and beverages except water served. I was able to reach my destination safe securely and Air India is still happening to run flights, though their prices are higher than average. This crisis has shown a face of the airline that is otherwise not seen by the regular public.	1
Flight from Bogota to Paris in the new Boeing 787 was nice and comfortable even in economy class. The service in Air France is outstanding. flight attendants are very receptive and show a good and educated way to help the people at the airplane. I liked very much the way Air France is doing things lately, its no doubt a great improvement on the service this company is bringing.	1
Flew Air New Zealand from Auckland to Tokyo. Top class services, tasty lunch and breakfast, high resolution screens, On demand food and drinks, comfortable seats, high quality cushion and blanket. An airline for five star upgrade.	1
I had a good flight from Glasgow to Toronto with Air Transat. Cabin crew were first class, on my return flight again cabin crew were very professional and pleasant. The aircraft was clean, a good choice of entertainment and the meals were ok. Thank you for a great service and excellent value for money.	1
Mumbai to Delhi by Air India. Me and my partner had purchased tickets to go to our final destination but as there was no direct flights, we had to book the flight to our destination via Delhi. The booking process was smooth especially when you consider that during the covid-19 crisis, most carriers were busy cancelling flights,  however we noticed that Air India flights were operating and looking at the previous record of flights we decided to go ahead with them. The tickets were on the high side but in these times having an airline actually fly instead of cancelling the flight is a game changer. The boarding actually started well before the scheduled time and as there were lots of passengers flying, a Boeing 777 was used instead of the Airbus. There was no food on this flight and for those allotted the middle seats, we had to wear the PPE equipment provided by the airline. Departure and arrival were both on time. So bravo Air India for once again coming to the nations rescue not only during the Vande Bharat missions but also during these difficult times. My impression of Air India during this crisis has increased leaps and bounds.	1
Hong Kong to Auckland, this was an almost perfect flight. The crew were friendly, engaging and chatty - the purser spent time chatting to passengers and welcoming them aboard. There were top-ups of the champagne before take-off and the airline really excelled with their food and wine. They have a large list of high-end wines available, and were very proactive about getting passengers to taste them. The food was innovative and delicious - I had my first ever burger on a plane, and it was very good. IFE was well selected and varied. The amenity kit was great and high quality, and included lip balm and hand cream by a quality NZ company. Whilst the seat faced away from the window, I found the product itself very comfortable for both reclining and sleeping, and really liked the fact that they have a mattress on the bed, and large pillows - I slept really well. Loved everything about the trip!	1
Auckland to Vancouver. Outstanding service on a busy route. Meals and beverages were top class and very reflective of Kiwi cuisine. Seat was very comfortable both for reclining and sleeping. Cabin crew went out of his way to talk to customers, even shaking  hands prior to being seated for landing.	1
Paris to London. Really enjoyed flying with Air France. The aircraft was clean and looking new. Boarding was very organised and all cabin crew were polite and professional. Sandwiches and beverages were offered during this 40 mins flight.	1
Paris to Zurich. It was a short nice trip. It departed and arrived on time. Baggage claim was pretty fast. Food and drink were served during the flight, even thought its duration was only 75 minutes. The aircraft is very clean. In general, I felt highly satisfied and had nothing to complain!	1
This was our 2nd Air New Zealand Perth to Las Vegas Premium Economy flight. Wife was unfortunately hospitalised in Las Vegas after a fall and our return was delayed by a week. Insurance Company contacted Air NZ and we were rebooked for a week later than original flights. Wife and accompanying nurse travelled Business, myself in Premium Economy. Ground and Aircrew of both United and Air NZ were outstanding in the care and concern for my wife's comfort and safety. Being unable to stand & walk she had to be lifted in and out of wheelchairs and seats. I was also given unrestricted entry into Business Class to visit her and during our Auckland stopover given complimentary to the business Lounge. We are forever grateful.	1
Auckland to Shanghai. Effortless service, exceptional, welcome, great Business class product made better by the onboard team. Nothing was a problem for them, felt incredibly valued and looked after pre, during and on arrival into Shanghai to connect with Virgin Atlantic. Well done Air New Zealand.	1
Kiev to Montréal via Paris. I really enjoyed my trip with them. The flight attendant were so mannered. The food was so delicious and so filling.The pilot too did a great Job. I will recommend this flight.	1
Auckland to Sydney. Great experience on Air New Zealand. No fuss at any point and a key highlight was the in-flight entertainment system. It was much more responsive than others that I had used on the trip and the introduction video on how to use your seat is well worth a watch. I never realised the sides of the headrests on the seats fold in. Apparently this is a feature on most planes with headrests. Made the 14 and 7 hour flights back from Sydney much better once I knew that bit of information.	1
Agartala to Kolkata. I was traveling with my elder sister who is more than 70 years old. The airline staff were really caring and helpful in the entire process of check in, boarding, deboarding, and luggage collection. They took special care to arrange equipment so that my sister can easily reach her seat. Actually, she was not able to use stair to reach her seat.	1
I had a surprisingly stellar experience despite an overall horrific travel experience. I had booked my initial travel on business class on Polish Airlines from Los Angeles to Tblisi since it was the shortest flight in the duration of 18.5 total. It was on May 3th, 2019. By the time I got to Warsaw and waited for 6 hours that was expected, then there were delays, then unexpectedly they cancelled the flight at the last moment and informed us that we needed to wait for another 24 hours to fly to Tbilisi. They did provide a hotel. However, I had a family waiting for me for a celebration and I needed to get to Tbilisi as soon as possible. So, I arranged an arduous fight back to Paris, then to Tbilisi that saved more time. My overall flight lasted 37 hours and included lots of schlepping, but I have to mention the detour through Air France that provided light and amazing service through this ordeal. The flight to Paris included this delightful female (unfortunately I didn’t get her name) flight attendant that made things so pleasant. From Paris to Tblisi, on the last exhausting leg, I encountered a flight attendant named Patrick, who made my day pleasant. I can not undermine how he changed my horrific flight experience to quite pleasant. He was authentic, didn’t try too hard. light attendants have a difficult job of dealing with stressed public.	1
Paris to Vienna. My recent flight with AF was a pleasure from beginning to end. Easy to use IOS app both at purchase and check in. Airport check in was smooth with no line at CDG T2F. Security line was longish, but not too bad. Hand luggage allowance is generous (12 kg). Boarding was fast and ordered, divided by zones. Economy new seat is great in terms of comfort. Cabin was clean. Breakfast consisted of pain du chocolate and coffee/tee/soft drink which was ok for 80 min flight. New entertainment system was a huge surprise to me. You log in to Air France onboard wifi and get internet for messaging for free, plus flight info plus variety of tv shows and movies, also for free. USB port is at every seat. Arrived on time, bag was on the belt in 15 min. Miles arrived to my account next morning. Flight price was 44 euro. Brilliant.	1
We just had a family holiday to the US via Air New Zealand in economy class. On our return my youngest son didn’t feel well during the flight. As we transfer plane at Auckland airport bound to Perth, he was able to take panadol and an hour of sleep but still didn’t do any help. After a 4 hr stopover, we boarded our flight bound to Perth=. As my son seated in the economy class, he slept curling on his father’s shoulder. Looking at this, I approached one of the Stewardess and requested for vacant seats so my son can lay down and sleep. After my explanation, she led me to 3 vacant seats, and he moved and slept for the flight to Perth. While my son was asleep, I went to check him and saw the 3 seats converted into skycouch (with no extra charge to us). I am very much grateful to Air New Zealand for their sensitivity to its customer’s needs and I would like to sincerely thank the stewardess for giving my son the nice and comfortable acommodation.	1
Mumbai to Delhi. A perfect flight. This was the first domestic flight that I have taken with Air India. As I have not had a favorable experience on their international service, I was not expecting much. The flight took of on time with pleasant flight attendants. On this 1.5 hour flight, they served a delicous dinner with remarkable efficiency. Contrast that with 5 hour flights across North America where we only get pretzels! The flight landed 10 minutes. All in all, it was really a perfect flight as I had no negative issues at all. Everything was really as it should be. Well done Air India!	1
Perth to Buenos Aires via Auckland. Staff are amazing and attentive from booking through to travel, check in easy, premium economy is well worth the fare (if bought at a good time), food and entertainment of prem economy is business class quality. There were some minor hiccups with flight changes/delays but apologetic staff as well as some compensation offered made up for any concerns i had.	1
I flew home to Toronto from Punta Cana Friday January 20th at 2:30 pm Dominican Republic time. I picked up a virus or parasite on my trip and was quite ill by the time we boarded. I would like to say the flight attendant was amazing. She asked a lady beside my wife and I if she wouldn't mind changing seats so that I could have more room to stretch out to sleep. She not only did that she got cold towels for my head and neck and gave me a blanket. She also gave my wife a bottle of champagne and a glass of wine to the lady who graciously changed seats. She went above and beyond the call of duty and honestly I don't know how I could have gotten through the flight home if it wasn't for her. She sat in the jump seat near the exit I don't know her name but she should be commended for her compassion. I will never forget the kindness of your flight attendant.	1
Auckland - Melbourne in Premium Economy. Air New Zealand Premium Economy is an excellent product, the seats were comfortable with generous legroom. The meal service was business class standard and the cabin crew exemplified the usual friendly Kiwi service we have come to expect with Air NZ.	1
Exceptional service - the business class cabin is superbly laid out matched by friendly considered service, sublime entertainment IFE and great menu and offer befitting this short hop from Auckland to Melbourne. Well done Air New Zealand on getting this just right. Thank you for the upgrade from Premium to Business.	1
I flew from Paris to Taipei with Air France, the entire journey was perfect. I used the Air France app for the check in which was easy to use. The cabin crews were very polite, friendly and professional. The food served was quite good compared to other airlines and champagne was available even on economy class (free of charge). The aircraft was looking clean with comfortable seat and plenty of new movies on the inflight entertainment system. Thank you Air France.	1
First time on Premium Economy with New Zealand on a long-haul flight from Auckland to Houston, and I came away impressed. It was by far the best Premium Economy-Experience that I have had. The seat was a very comfortable recliner seat with generous legroom and recline. The legroom on NZ is noticeably greater than on most other carriers with PE. Furthermore, all seats have a leg-rest. The inflight service was comparable to Business Class service. The quality of the food was excellent, and the service very friendly and attentive.	1
After calling the very efficient Air NZ call centre, they advised me to book on NZ2, AKL/LAX on 23 December as I would be able to get a recognition upgrade cleared and I could move from the Premium Economy cabin to Business Class. The crew in the Business Class cabin didn’t fail to deliver and it is the small details that make this airline stand out. The staff remembered customer’s names without having to refer to a passenger manifest. They also remembered drink choices and provided regular top ups. As I am a dessert freak, they offered me a second and a third dessert which I accepted without hesitation. After dinner I went to the bathroom and came back to find my bed had been made up for me. The bed is very good too and the mattress topper makes all the difference. All through the night the staff move quietly throughout the cabin and if you are awake, they are willing to bring you a hot or cold drink or some snacks. The new amenity packs are a vast improvement too. All in all, this was a very good flight and the level of service from the crew was stellar.	1
Calgary to Manchester. I was dubious to fly with Air Transat again, even though my trips to the UK, from Canada over the last 25 years have been with this airline. However their prices are amazing and a non stop flight is a must for a nervous passenger such as myself. I needn't have worried - the flight was smooth and relaxing, new planes and TV connection could not have been better.  The cabin staff were amazing, nothing was too much trouble for them. PS: Take your own food, it is really bad !	1
Short flight from Paris to Madrid but excellently executed by Air France. Check in simple and fast, fast track through passport and security, fabulous lounge with nice breakfast available. Efficient boarding, new comfortable aircraft with friendly staff. Flight arrived on time. Air France consistently performs.	1
London Heathrow to Paris CDG. Really enjoyed flying with Air France. Boarding was fast and organised, new aircraft, friendly staff and croissants and hot beverages was offered during this 40mins flight. Totally recommend Air France.	1
Apia to Auckland. It is  a pleasure to fly with this airline. The aircraft made a newer, clean and modern impression. The crew was friendly, had time for small talk and was extremely helpful. The on-board catering met higher standards and drinks were served several times and in sufficient quantities. A large number of films and music rounded off this very good flight. No questions, the flight was in time.	1
I was very eager to try Air New Zealand during my recent trip to Tahiti. It was my first time in their Premiim Economy cabin. A flight attendant introduced herself to passengers on board and explained the features on the seat. Meal service was done business class style - the entree and dessert are served on a tray and the main course followed. The seat was upholstered with leather and had a very good recline and pitch. I was very impressed by the cheerfulness and enthusiasm of the flight attendants on board. Despite the AKL-PPT-AKL turnaround route being a tiring long red-eye flight, they remained at their very best throughout the 5-hour flight attending to and anticipating passengers’ needs. At Auckland Airport, Premium Economy passengers had a dedicated check-in lounge shared with business class. Luggage was tagged as priority and priority boarding was also accorded to Premium Economy passengers. Air New Zealand’s Premium Economy product definitely punches above its weight.	1
I flew with Air France from London Heathrow to Ho Chi Minh City via Paris. Both flights were enjoyable. The seats were comfortable, both aircraft looked new and clean. Flight attendants were polite, friendly and helpful. The food served for the Paris - Ho Chi Minh was quiet good compared to other airlines. Hope to fly with Air France again soon.	1
Amsterdam to Vancouver with Air Transat. We had an amazing flight from start to finish. We have flown several times before with Air Transat, but this was our first time in Club Class and very enjoyable. Lots of leg room and wide seats. The extra perks were really nice - priority check in, priority baggage, great service, lots of food and drink, extra snacks. Loved the special coffees and warm cookies. Wonderful staff - very attentive, kind and caring. We will definitely fly with Air Transat and Club Class again.	1
Manchester to Toronto with Air Transat. Cannot fault any part of the service provided. No hesitation in recommending. Pleasant cabin crew, comfortable seating. Food more than adequate, sufficient fluids provided. Plenty of entertainment choices onboard. Return flight delayed but not through fault of airline.	1
The Air Transat flight from Prague to Montreal was a very nice surprise! The A330 looked brand new and was comfortable with enough leg space and sufficient incline angle. Seats were equiped with interactive screens. The toilet was clean. The FA were professional and helpful. We were served drinks several times during the 8 hour flight and the bistro menu was not bad at all giving the choice of about 6 different options. The vegetarian sushi was nice. We got a slice of good pizza shortly before our landing in YUL. Arrived to YUL 25 minutes before scheduled time. Great value for a one way ticket. Overall a very favorable experience. Would not hesitate to fly with them again.	1
Bogota to Paris. I have been greatly impressed by the quality of the whole experience with Air France, from ground staff to the flight. I am reviewing the BOG-CDG segment of my trip, but I actually did BOG-CDG-MRS back and forth. All legs in Economy class, except CDG-BOG in Economy Plus (upgrade). Luggage check-in at BOG airport: uneventful, despite the date (December 22), it was rather organized, but I have to admit, the waiting time was a bit long (30 minutes). Boarding at gate level was very well organized, by groups, and they enforced the group system, which is a rare occurrence at BOG airport. This resulted in a well organized and hassle free process. Aircraft was a Boeing 787-9. This plane is a great enhancement from previous A340. Economy seat was comfortable enough, IFE with a good quality screen and a great movie and series selection. Wifi is available during the flight, quality and speed was good, but 20 Mb for 5 euros is expensive. Food has been in good quantity and super quality, I actually enjoyed it. Cabin crew have been excellent, very professional, attentive and well mannered. I never felt pressured like I nearly always feel with US companies (esp. United). I want to highlight that cabin crew have been consistent across the 4 flights I did. Finally, for my last leg (CDG-BOG), a cabin crew member was reported to have passed out like 5 minutes before boarding but they found a replacement crew member in 10 minutes. I was quite impressed! Of course CDG is their worldwide hub and they have a number of crew in stand by. I would definitely recommend Air France.	1
I haven't flown Air New Zealand for some years and was pleasantly surprised by the premium economy product on offer flying from Singapore to Auckland. The service was excellent as was the food and ground handling. Small closed of cabin 21 PAX with own toilet. 2 dedicated flight attendants who were constantly around the cabin. Snacks can be ordered from seat screen. A totally slick and professional operation theat Air NZ should be proud of.	1
Excellent family trip. Travelling with 2 children - aged 4 years and 7 months on a long haul flight - Melbourne - Auckland - San Francisco. Bulkhead row with baby basinet. Expecting a challenging trip with small children, all flights were a dream. Service was excellent from all on board and a great aircraft. Couldn't fault anything, staff were very helpful, food was good, entertainment options were great. Value for money was incredible - less than AU$900 each for 3 seats, and including a basinet for bubs.	1
Paris to Sao Paulo. Simply the best flight of 2018. I have flown more than 70 times this year in all classes but this was head and shoulders above the rest. Everything about this flight was 10/10 except the service which was 20/10. I was flying Premium Economy but it felt like I was in First Class. The staff on this flight were so thoughtful, simple things, like getting the liquor I like from Business class, espresso coffee, frequently checking if i needed anything else, the staff could not do enough. I am Platinum with Air France and the staff really make you feel like you have made the right decision by choosing Air France as your airline of choice. Air France consistently delivers for its Frequent Flyers. Aside from the benefits I enjoyed because of my status the flight was also 10/10. Comfortable seat, excellent entertainment and very tasty food. The cabin was as always in excellent condition and spotless. The key for any memorable flight is its crew and this crew rates amongst the very best I have ever flown with in 30 years of travelling.	1
Tokyo-Auckland return. The out-going trip was excellent - one of the best I've had in economy class. Incredibly attentive, friendly, proactive crew. If they saw our water bottles were empty, they offered to refill them, and as we were sitting near the galley where some passengers were congregating, they offered us noise-cancelling earphones from Business Class. I love that Air NZ offers five quality wines, and that with breakfast on both legs they served Sparkling Wine. Food, service and IFE was great. On the return trip, it was good but lacked any spark. Crew tended to be going through the motions, and the food was very average - which was surprising given it departed from Auckland. But the wine and IFE made up for it, and the seats were comfortable and the legroom was spacious.	1
Air New Zealand were fabulous. From the time you get to the gate (could not rate check in as we had a connnecting flight with AC before Vancouver) to the arrival in Auckland: perfect service all the way. The ground personnel and flight attendants are polite, attentive, empathic. Air NZ even has wine expert in economy class onboard. Although the flight is very long, service was so smooth and well done that it went quickly. We were booked on a codeshare with United on the way back: absolutely terrible. Whenever possible I will travel Air New Zealand.	1
Check in was fine, no time for the lounge at Brisbane. The first sector was perfect, wonderful crew, great food and wine. Called by name by all crew including inflight service manager on departure. Auckland lounge was full and had plenty of food and drink variety. SFO flight left on time and arrived early. Crew not as warm as previous however food and wine was better than most restaurants. Meals were surprisingly good, especially the Michael Meredith designed menu items. Bed was extremely comfortable. IFE good. Overall was as good as business class gets, was in a cab leaving SFO airport within 30 minutes of landing and 15 minutes ahead of scheduled arrival. Other than the second crew being more jaded than the first this was as good as any business class that we have ever flown on.	1
On my flight from London to Auckland via Los Angeles from boarding to disembarking Air New Zealand are exceptional. The fantastic welcome and genuine care and attention from the team onboard really make this trip a treat. Service and onboard team are genuine, smartly dressed, cabin interior spotless and onboard service offer is what I would expect and then a little extra. Ondemand offer and inflight entertainment plus transit through LAX - a job made easy through a great supply chain with Air NZ team on board and on the ground	1
New Delhi to Dubai and I had a great Flight. I would like to specially Mention a senior cabin crew, Sheetal. who was very kind and dedicated towards her job. Thank you for your hospitality.	1
I flew Auckland - Los Angeles return on NZ6 & NZ5 recently. The business class cabins on this route are always full these days. With that, service levels were never compromised, the crew were always friendly and professional. One of the stewards remembered me from the same flight in February and remembered that my drink of choice was Single Malt Whisky. The main course choice for me on the outward route was the most sublime Beef Rib Roast that I have ever tasted. All through the night there is a crew member available for anything you need and a good range of snacks and drinks are available. The inward flight was 30 minutes late leaving due to passengers not turning up for the flight, but we still arrived back in Auckland early. Without a doubt Air New Zealand would always be my airline of choice for this route.	1
Mumbai to Bengaluru by Air India. On this late afternoon flight to Bengaluru, the flight was on the lighter side and so, as a result, the check-in process was a breeze and boarding started well before the scheduled boarding time. A light snack was provided consisting of a savoury cake and samosas/pav bhaji and the portions were generous in quantity which was well appreciated. The crew was friendly and engaging which was good. The flight departed on time and arrived well before the scheduled arrival time which was a huge plus. Air India provides great value for money and they should keep it up.	1
Krakow to Amsterdam via Paris. This company is improving steadily each day. Their management of delays is top of the line. I got instantly rebooked to an earlier flight in order to get on time for my connecting flight in Amsterdam.	1
Prague to Paris. I have never written a review before, however, the kindness of Air France  staff was so exemplary that I felt moved to inform  of my wonderful experience. On October 24, 2018 my husband and I were delayed in traffic by an airport shuttle. Having never missed a flight before, I was understandably trying to conceal my panic. Air France lovely, professional and kind staff couldn't have been any nicer. They assisted us in finding another flight to Paris which allowed us to continue uninterrupted back to the States. I honestly felt like I wanted to hug them. I have occasionally heard that the French could be somewhat cool, (which I am sure came from a somewhat cool individual themselves.) I would like to report that Air France staff showed the kindness and empathy that I am sure truly represents your beautiful country! Thank you for a wonderful flight with your beautiful staff. We will always choose Air France when possible.	1
Tokyo to Auckland. I traveled firstly from Whangarei to Auckland and the baggage handlers seriously damaged my bag. I Flow the next day and on arrival e-mailed Air NZ. The response was immediate, and was sorted out then and there. They replaced my bag so I was able to travel 3 weeks with no hastles. Narita Airport ground staff were fantastic. I am Gluten intolerant and the meals were great.	1
Auckland to Wellington. The staff on the flight NZ449 were outstanding. I was travelling with my daughter back home and they topped our trip off. She had a grin on her face from the start of the flight until the end of the flight. Thank you for making her feel like she was the only one on the plane. She will definitely remember this experience!	1
Toronto to Punta Cana with Air Transat. A 4hr flight and they were extremely customer service oriented. Taking off and landing on time, the service on the plane was fantastic.  Return flight was exceptional. The attendants even recommended that we take other empty seats to be more comfortable - we were 4 (2 parents and 2 five year olds). They gave our boys a kiddie loot bag that had headphones that the boys could use for the inflight entertainment. Thank you for a great flight/service.	1
Bengaluru to Mumbai. On this early morning flight, it was surprising to note that the check-in was a breeze and the flight was not  full. There was a hot breakfast provided which was of good quality. The flight attendants were attentive and looked after the safety and comfort of passengers.  Luggage was received swiftly without too much waiting.	1
Paris CDG to Budapest. An outstanding flight with Air France. Accross the airport the ground personel was very helpful to the passengers. The flight departed on time. The plane was remarkably clean when we boarded. There was good legroom aboard this small aircraft and the seat was comfortable for a short 2 hours flight. We received a waffle and a biscuit during the flights, which were acceptable. The drinks on board were excellent. Throughout the flight, the crew was kind and sometimes the attendants had a short talk with passengers. Finally, the landing was soft and we arrived to the gate 15 minutes before scheduled arrival time. Note that inflight entertainment is free, but offered on a personal device.	1
Must say having had a fantastic experience a few days earlier to get this flight it made this flight much easier. The plane was packed full with people however, I never felt like I didn't have enough space. On a 10.5 hour flight I still managed to sleep for more than 5 hours. Really liked the staff and the way the plane was organized.	1
Flew from London to Los Angeles. Was curious to fly Air New Zealand expecting it would be good. After many hours of flights on all kind of airlines, I must say it was a fantastic (kiwi) experience. Very professional, experienced staff, I loved the space on the 777-300 and managed to have a very good sleep. The system to order a drink is fantastic. The inflight Entertainment is not as good as the Middle East competitors, but the comfort and staff made it much easier to deal with the trip.	1
Flew from Auckland to Christchurch with Air New Zealand, plane was clean and new, seats were comfortable and the crew were very professional. Service was excellent for the short flight, complimentary tea, coffee and water were provided along with a light snack and lollies.	1
London to Paris. Really enjoyed flying with Air France. The aircraft was looking new with beautiful and clean cabin. The cabin crew who served me was smiley, friendly and attentive. Hot beverages and pastries was offered during this 40 mins flight. Definitely flying with Air France again.	1
Flew Christchurch to Melbourne. I had a hiking accident while in New Zealand resulting in surgery for a fracture. Air New Zealand were fantastic helping me to change my flight, listening to my sorry tale, ringing me while I was still in hospital to see what help they could offer and best of all organising a row to myself so I could elevate my leg. The flight attendant kept a watchful eye on me the entire flight continually checking on me. Thank you so much Air NZ.	1
I flew from Lucknow to Delhi, a short sector of just 45 minutes it was nice to see the crew served food boxes which composed of a veg sandwich and a mango juice. The best part was the 25kg Free check in luggage. I would fly air India again.	1
Auckland to Nadi return. Extremely enjoyable flights both ways on recently renovated aircraft. Breakfast flight over was really good and arrived early. Return flight was a full lunch flight and the crew worked hard and were accommodating. Most were personable, mature crew members but unlike some US airlines the senior crew members could still manage a genuine smile. They looked like they enjoyed flying together. Food very good apart from dessert at lunch, which was dry, but I had no room after the cheese anyway. Check in in Fiji slow and a surly airport staff member who barely looked at you. Otherwise really great. Flights on time both ways, new Nadi lounge was good, bags off quickly both times.	1
Brisbane to Wellington via Auckland. The service on the trans Tasman legs was exceptional. The food was very good and wine sublime, there is a new Fine Wines of NZ program that features the best wines in the country. Crew smiling and accommodating and personal in their service. One crew member recalled us from one flight to another and asked about our holiday with sufficient detail that he had been listening to the previous conversation. Brisbane lounge although new is humble re reading material and food. Auckland is much better, Wellington domestic the best of the lot. We missed our domestic connection in AKL due to long queues in the airport, this was handled well by the airline. Departure in AKL was the only glitch, the call in the lounge that the plane is in the final stages of boarding and when at the gate waiting another 30 minutes to board Business. This was the only glitch, otherwise for international short haul this was close to perfect.	1
I was pleasantly surprised by the overall experience on this 1 hour flight from Lucknow to Jaipur. The check in was smooth and in the flight I was surprised that they serve sandwiches on such a short flight and making rounds asking passengers for more. The free baggage allowance and seat assignment is another reason  represents the full service tag.	1
We flew Air New Zealand in Business Premier from Melbourne to Auckland to Vancouver on April 8 and thought it was excellent. The lie-flat bed was very, very comfortable, allowing me to sleep for over seven hours on the AKL-YVR leg. The food was excellent, especially dinner, the lamb being of restaurant quality. Staff were very attentive and cheerful. Overall, an excellent experience, highly recommended.	1
I had read some of the reviews, so was a little concerned, but loved the price. There was no charge for our luggage! We got lunch, with a complimentary glass of wine at no extra cost. We also got a snack shortly before descending into Vancouver. The entertainment was in the seatback in front of me. Movies, TV shows, etc, again, no extra cost.	1
Paris to Budapest. I’ve been traveling a lot, but never met a nice, friendly and smiley staff like I met today! Although it was early morning they did their job perfectly. They made my day. I would like to say a big thank you ! I wish the Air France had more cabin crew like they are.	1
Queenstown to Auckland, and first time with Air New Zealand and impressed! The aircraft was new, with a nice interior. The safety video was fun and engaging. Cabin communications frequent and detailed. Hostesses were friendly. Some cheese and drinks offered, for a not long domestic flight it's appreciated. No individual screens, but some quizzes on the shared screens. A great experience, only a shame that due to geography AKL cannot be an international hub.	1
Bought upgrade at check-in. Superb value. It was only £200 for the upgrade to their business class. It is actually only a premium economy class but it was excellent. Brilliant service, very good food and very comfortable new seating. I was flying Manchester to Toronto which I do quite regularly.	1
Los Angeles to London Heathrow on New Year's Day with Air New Zealand. Full cabin in Business Class. Love the seats and foot stool and conversion to flat bed. The seats have a good range of positions and the table is large enough. The entertainment system was fully operational. Food and beverage choices were very good.  The flight attendants were professional, friendly and helpful - we can't speak highly enough of them, both outbound and inbound. The ground staff were also pleasant and helpful.	1
Just returned from Vancouver to London on a direct flight in club class. We were surprised and pleased with the level of service and the constant supply of food and drink the food was very good. The stewardess was very pleasant and professional. The airfares are much lower than other airlines. Those who complain about minor issues your not in a 5 star hotel for a week remember it's a cheap flight you've booked for a few hours travel. Pay a much higher price with a premium airline next time and then make a comparison. We will book again with Air Transat for our next trip to Canada.	1
My trip was YYZ-PUJ (Punta Cana) May 9 out and 16 back. I have nothing but praise for this airline. Our flights were boarded on time and departed as such. The onboard service was exceptional friendly crew beautifully spacious A330 and fantastic entertainment package. Seats were comfortable and did not get the feeling of being cramped.	1
Flying return from Auckland to London Heathrow I had a pretty good experience. On my first flight, I didnt have a copy of the airline magazine, and asked the staff. They explained that something had happened and they hadn't been put on the flight. I wasn't originally best pleased. A week later, as I boarded my flight back to NZ, I presented my boarding pass while getting on the plane. The steward immediately said "David I've heard you missed out on the Kia Ora magazine last flight, we've got a copy here ready for you". They brought this to my seat a few minutes later, with another apology for not having it the first time. 	1
I flew Air New Zealand from London to Los Angeles on Christmas Day, the staff were excellent. An empty seat opposite my seat was made up as my bed. Food very good. The use of the Singapore Airlines Lounge at Heathrow Terminal 2 is a great start to the flight.	1
Auckland to Los Angeles with Air New Zealand. Great service, good food, very comfortable flat bed, although somewhat finicky compared to other airlines in that it isn't simple to set up without help from service staff. Privacy is better achieved by getting a seat at rear bulkhead. Lounge at Auckland busy, but service staff walling around and offering snacks and drinks is a nice touch.	1
TS 732 to Lisbon on April 19th. Cabin crew professional and courteous informative about rules kind to elderly passengers on board who didn't understand the language or had hearing problems. Food and beverages were served in a timely manner allowing passengers to get some sleep. Pilots were kind to introduce the team and give some flight information. Check in at airport was also smooth. I was seated in 23 A.	1
Paris to Santiago de Chile. Great flight. The aircraft was looking new and clean, economy seats are quite comfortable and the inflight entertainment screen is larger than others airlines full of music albums and movies. Flight attendants were friendly and professional, the food was not bad. Definitely flying with Air France again.	1
From boarding to arrival an exceptional experience with Air New Zealand from YVR to AKL. Comfortable seat both in upright and fully flat configuration. Pleasant cabin ambiance with cool colours and fresh looking environment. Food choices were ample and my fish was prepared just right. Limited but good quality wines and a wide array of other beverages including champagne and several beer labels. FA's were nothing short of outstanding with smiles all around even after 14 hours in the air. IFE had a rich library of movies and music. Flight departed and landed on time. 	1
Travelled Works Deluxe and one of the most relaxing experiences in a long time. I arrived at Queenstown airport much earlier than I would normally check-in. As I entered the terminal an announcement was made to say that bags could be checked in then. I was able to use my passport to confirm checkin and drop my bag off, assisted by an Air New Zealand representative staff. I used the Koru lounge and enjoyed a very relaxing few hours. The lounge was not exceptionally busy although the number of people increased over the time I was waiting. Onboard I found the flight attendants excellent, very engaging with the announcements and safety messages, and the whole team were most professional.	1
Edmonton to Puerto Vallarta on Dec 27 2014 and back on Jan 10 2015. Excellent especially if you have kids! They have a special family line up which is so helpful and makes the airline stand out! Overall our trip to Mexico was great flights were on time the inflight entertainment was great and we had no problem paying for the food.	1
Bangalore to Mumbai. I usually travel to Bangalore for business/ work related trips and have gone by Air India and never encountered any problems. The checkin process was smooth and baggage drop without any hassles. The flight departed on time, was pretty full with an all female cabin crew who managed to do a very good job of looking after passengers. On this short segment, a hot breakfast was served (Air India serves an all vegeterian meal on all their domestic sectors) which was very good. This was an excellent, smooth flight which was handled well from start to finish. Would definitely fly with them again.	1
Really enjoyed flying with Air France from London to Paris. Boarding was very smooth and fast. The aircraft was very clean. Cabin crews very friendly and attentive, beverages and chocolate cookies were offered during this 40 minute flight from London to Paris. Even pillows were offered to passengers. Definitely flying with Air France again!	1
I had great flights with Air New Zealand, but didn't like was having to transit through LAX on my outward journey. In spite of some improvements LAX is still a nightmare. I returned from Auckland to Singapore on AirNZ and transferred to Singapore Airlines for the second half of the journey. The flight attendants on both airlines are great but I found the food, wine, seat and IFE are superior on Air NZ. They also provided a nice amenity bag.	1
I travel with Air Transat 3 to 4 times a year from LGW to Toronto and have not as yet a complaint to make. I have found the crew up to now very helpful. I always travel option plus purely so I can be one of those that get settled on the plane first and for my suitcase being one of the first off at the other end. Also for extra luggage allowance I find this well worth it. I have also found the staff on the other end of the phone when I have a query are also very helpful. I hope this will continue.	1
Flew Southampton to Dubai via Paris CDG. Our first long haul flight with Air France we chose their business class over BA Club world even though it meant changing aircraft. The whole experience was excellent. I lost my computer in Paris and the ground crew amazingly found it and bought it to the lounge for me. Lounge in hall L 2 F was brand new and excellent. Slight delay caused by heavy snow. On board was new business cabin, really comfortable seat. Food exquisite and beverages all good. Cabin crew all excellent. Can not fault them.	1
Flew Los Angeles to London in the Air New Zealand Premium Economy "space seat" and was pleasantly surprised. We were treated better in Premium Economy than we have been in Business class on some airlines. Priority check-in, boarding, luggage. The seat is very comfortable even though the recline is limited. But it is wide enough and has enough room to stretch out in several different positions. They give you a brochure to show you the many different options. The IFE was excellent and cabin crew was outstanding. Food was very good and plentiful. The separate cabin with its own lavs made it feel private. (Even music in the laws!) We tried this class of service to decide whether or not to spend the money on Business for our two upcoming European trips. We decided we would rather change planes in LHR and stay in Premium Economy than to pay thousands more for Business.	1
Los Angeles to London on their Boeing 777. We would vote the maximum for Air New Zealand. The aircraft was new and super clean, the crew were nice and kind, and also never absent in the cabin for a long time. The meals were tasty, and the inflight entertainment was individual PTV with plenty of movies, series and games. A peaceful, nice, and entertaining flight!	1
London to Vancouver via Paris. Clean and beautiful cabin on the Boeing 777 with reasonable space between the seats, flight attendants were smiling and friendly. The lunch was served approximately 2 hours after take off, food was delicious and cabin crews were attentive during service. Many movies and music albums on the inflight entertainment kept me occupied during this 10 hours flight. Enjoy very much flying with Air France.	1
Flew Air France from Naples to Paris CDG. What a great flight. The lounge at Naples Airport was great: the quality of food is great. The boarding was very efficient. The staff on board were very kind and extremely helpful. The food was tasty and delicious: pasta salad with Italian artichoke. Chicken with olives tapenades and as dessert a typical cake from Brittany. The drink: champagne: marvellous. Tea : mint tea from me palaos du the: very enjoyable. The flight was on time: what a perfect day and flight.	1
Heathrow to Paris CDG. Arrived four minutes late at check-in for a midday Paris flight. Instead of the usual "you're too late" they sent us to another desk next to check-in who found us two seats on the same very full flight. It was all extremely professional with no fuss. The flight was delayed by an technical problem involving an aircraft change but they apologised several times and kept us informed to the minute. Next problem my son had his guitar with him in a soft cover. The gate check-in advised us that it was at the captain and cabin crew's discretion if it was to be allowed in the cabin or had to go in the hold. As we entered the aircraft a smiling purser and smiling senior stewardess asked if he wanted to keep us entertained, but seriously found a safe place for the guitar despite being on a very full A319. The flight got to Paris in 45 minutes and during which the still smiling the crew served a roll and brought round the drinks trolley. I assumed they were enjoying what they were doing and enjoyed treating the passengers as customers. On the return two days later it was the same. There was no problem with the guitar - another happy team worked the cabin of a completely full A320 which was comfortable, and a decent amount of space between seats. Again a snack and drinks were served and the flight was very smooth in appalling weather.  I didn't realise it was still possible to enjoy flying, so thanks Air France for your professionalism and good humour, and look forward to flying with you again.	1
This was my first flight on Air New Zealand's premium economy (not space seat but new for 787's and new 777-200's). I normally fly business on this route as I fly it one a week. I tried premium economy and found it very good. The staff were very friendly and the meals great. IFE pretty good but I think Air New Zealand should put cameras on their planes so that their passengers can see the view from the outside (especially if you are in the middle rows). Great flight and I would definitely day on it again. I would still go Business class though on these flights because of the lie flat bed.	1
YYZ-GLA-YYZ economy class to GLA and Club back to YYZ. Plane left on time both directions  service was very good and cabin staff did a fine job cabin service was excellent food was ok typical plane food but no worse than any other airline I have flown. I would certainly use them again.	1
Paris to Vancouver. Enjoyed flying with Air France. Boarding was on time, organised and ground hostess were smiling and friendly. The aircraft was clean with a beautiful cabin. Economy seat are quite comfortable and the inflight entertainment is pretty good. An hour after take off lunch was served, food was good and more bread was offered during the service. Another lighter meal was served before landing in Vancouver. There was also a bar setup at the back of the aircraft with some snacks where passengers could help themselves in case they were hungry during this long flight. I travel very often and I have to say Air France is doing very well compared to other European airlines. Totally recommend flying Air France.	1
Paris to Rio de Janeiro. Not the new best cabin but still very good comfort and the best deal on the route. Night flight with excellent night dinner with superb foie gras and very good choice of wines (three white, three reds). Flight entertainment is perfect. Air France plus is their breakfast service (warm brioche and real expresso on demand). Even their toilets were clean despite a full flight.	1
Outbound flight 19th Oct 2014 Manchester to Calgary TS215. Inbound Flight 26th Oct 2014 Calgary to Manchester TS214. First time Flying with Air Transat and we were very impressed with the whole experience from booking the flight to checking in online and the flight from Manchester to Calgary and back again. The staff couldn't do enough for you and I have flown with many airlines around the world and have to say that Air Transat was one of or even the best so far. We shall be booking again in the near future to fly back to Canada and Definitely going with Air Transat again.	1
I flew to and from London Gatwick from Toronto Pearson returning home yesterday. Both flights were comfortable smooth with good service. I will definitely fly with Air Transat again. I was on the October 17th flight leaving Gatwick at noon and there was an elderly woman who required extra care. The flight attendants were wonderful very patient and extremely helpful. They moved her to a seat right beside a washroom checked on her repeatedly. I am very impressed.	1
Paris to Beijing. In my opinion the best First available. The course at CDG and La Première Lounge are just incredible. The onboard service and catering is of excellent quality. The bedding is very comfortable and the curtains isolate you very well from the aisle! One downside, you should avoid the two middle seats that are significantly worse!	1
Perfect short flight from London Heathrow to Paris Charles de Gaulle. Very easy check in on the Air France app. Boarding was fast and organised, the aircraft was clean and comfortable. The flight departed on time, pastries and hot beverages was offered for breakfast during this 40 mins flight. Totally enjoyed flying with Air France.	1
Lisbon to Paris CDG. Flight operated by Joon by Air France. Ticket at affordable price, with very good value for money. Ground service was kind and very fast. Comfortable seat and very helpful Cabin Staff service. Fast and free WiFi on board. Airline highly and definitely recommend.	1
The seat was comfortable because they add a foam mattress after extending the bed. The food was excellent, and the crew were lovely, cheerful and helpful. I have experienced crews on other airlines either making me feel like an idiot because I could not operate something, or acting put upon when I ask for help reaching the overhead bin (I am 5 feet tall and reaching retirement age). 	1
Flew Manchester to Calgary and Vancouver to Manchester everything from initial enquiry to returning back to Manchester was first class we flew club class plenty of room very good food for an airline and more than enough to drink. Also very good value.	1
Flew Air India from Surat to Sydney via Delhi. Both flights on time, ground-staff and cabin crew very friendly and attentive, IFE was fantastic. Food on the one of the best I've experienced. Transit in Delhi was fast, and everything from boarding to disembarkation went smoothly.	1
Enjoyed flying with Air France from London to Vancouver via Paris Charles de Gaulle. The connection in Charles de Gaulle Airport was easy and fast. Boarding was really organised and cabin crews were attentive and friendly. The aircraft cabin was clean and looking new. The food was very good compared to other airlines and the inflight entertainment was great with lots of different kinds of music albums and a good choice of recent movies. I do travel a lot and so far Air France is one of my favourite European airline.	1
Fantastic service as always with Air NZ. Seat quality and aeroplane upkeep was excellent. Good meals, although I slept through one. When I asked for a snack later, friendly staff took me down to the galley, and let me choose a tray of whatever I liked. I needed some assistance connecting my phone, and again, the staff handled it all for me. Didn't push the business class priority to the point that made economy 3rd class citizens, staff were friendly and welcoming throughout.	1
We flew with Air Transat MAN to YVR on 26 Sep returning 04 Oct in Club Class. From check-in at Manchester to disembarkation at Manchester 9 days later the service can not be faulted in anyway. We were made to feel special at all times. Pre take off drinks salad starter main course dessert cheese and warm bread Good wine choice. Their speciality coffee was a good touch. A large mug of coffee containing Grand Marnier and Baileys and cream on top. Yummy snack before landing at Vancouver. Very comprehensive IFE. Plenty of films tv shows etc. Return service the same. The seat was comfortable for a long flight. This was excellent value and service for a leisure airline. Our bags came off the plane first at both ends Well worth paying the extra.	1
September 26th 2014 - Manchester to Vancouver October 4th 2014 - Vancouver to Manchester. Booked over 12 months in advance directly with very friendly telephone agent in Montreal and got Club Class for a great price. Both flights on Airbus A330 with no itinerary changes. Very speedy check-in at Manchester with 'fast-lane' security included. Flight on time to the minute and as we were club passengers we boarded first. Greeted onboard by the staff and immediately offered us drinks and explained the workings of the seat and entertainment system. Legroom is more than comfortable and seats had a good recline. We were then given complimentary comfort packs headphones and amenity packs. After takeoff we were offered unlimited drinks before being served delicious meals served on china and tablecloths liqueurs after dinner and even came round with speciality coffee. Further snacks and drinks followed until we landed at Vancouver and our 'priority' luggage was delivered immediately. Similar service on the return flight and very organized hassle-free check in at Vancouver - again with 'fastlane' security. Plenty of drinks snacks hot-towels newspapers and a delicious Chicken dish served beautifully. After a relaxing flight a continental breakfast was served with fresh coffee juice and tea. We arrived at Manchester 20 minutes early. Air Transat offer a great Club Class experience for an amazing price. Seat comfort is probably not what you'll find in some other business class airlines but the clean cabin mood lighting relaxed atmosphere and very attentive service is exceptional. They only have 12 Club seats on a 345 seat aircraft so book early do avoid disappointment!	1
LAX to AKL. This was a superb flight thanks to a professional crew and modern aircraft. Meal choices of a high standard. There was a choice of snacks and drinks available, and staff available throughout the flight. The mattress on the lie flat bed makes a difference.	1
I did enjoy very much flying with Air France from Paris Charles de Gaulle airport to Vancouver. The aircraft looked new and the cabin was clean. Economy seat was comfortable and the entertainment screen was pretty big compared to other airlines. Food was good and a large choice of beverages were offered. Cabin crews were friendly and professional. It was a very pleasant flying with Air France.	1
NZ104 19 April SYD-AKL on the Dreamliner. The team in the business class cabin worked non stop during this relatively short flight delivering excellent service. The plane which was apparently Air New Zealands launch 787 was still new and abounded in technology. There is now a marked difference in the video entertainment system compared to other aircraft. The video screen is now High Definition and is like using a smartphone app. One thing you do immediately notice in the cabin is the size of the windows the cabin had a nice open feeling and the dimming feature meant that you could set the lighting to almost any setting that was comfortable. The meals included some of Peter Gordons creations the poached chicken salad was huge and did me for the rest of the day.	1
AKL to LAX on May 9. Great service. When flying economy on Air New Zealand's 777-300 I always choose one of the pairs of seats at the very back of the plane usually the second or third forward from the back. It's a bit tight in economy and the aisle is wider there. Crew were awesome. Food was fine. Price paid on one of the airlines many sales was excellent.	1
We flew direct from Vancouver to Paris and back. An excellent experience all around. Air Transat delivered great value for a very competitive fare. Flights departed on time and arrived early. Service was friendly professional and responsive. Cabins were clean and comfortable. We purchased the Option Plus package and would definitely do so again. The combination of seat selection priority check-in priority boarding extra weight allowance free drinks and snacks and comfort kit was worth the extra fee. We will certainly be travelling with Air Transat again soon.	1
I’ve had a very good experience flying with Air France, during this very short flight from London to Paris (40 mins flight). Flight departed on time, cabin crews were helpful and friendly, aircraft was very clean and new. Pain au chocolat and hot beverage served for breakfast. Totally recommend flying Air France.	1
Flew from Calgary back to Vancouver in August was pleased with the service plane tickets were cheap the flight was on time and the children got a special package at the end of the flight. Would definitely use them again.	1
I flew from Toronto to Dublin on July 31 on the A310 aircraft. The aircraft is cramped and only has the shared screens. Having said that the service on board was excellent. On my return flight on August 19 I was on board the A330. I also upgraded to Options Plus for the return flight. It is a much roomier plane with the individual screens. The service on the return trip was once again excellent. Air Transat has come along way and as a regular flyer their service can't be beat.	1
Flew Mumbai to Bhubaneswar. I was very surprised by the service, the whole Air India team was welcoming. There were more flight attendants than I see usually with other airlines. Each one was taking care of every customer. Most of the luggage lifting and its arrangement was done by them (unlike other airlines). Special care was taken of kids and elderly people. The airplanes have much spaced and are comfortable. (Similar to business class seats of other domestic Indian airlines). When I sat on my seat I felt like I had upgraded my ticket to business class at no extra cost). Each passenger was served a fresh and excellent meal at no extra cost (unlike super over charged stale sandwiches from the other domestic airlines). I am a foodie so trust me the food was amazing. They even served coffee and tea to everyone at no extra charge (I pay 160 Rs to 200 Rs for one coffee with other domestic airlines). The ambience of airplanes reflects the Indian culture. You receive warmth, love and care like you would receive from any Indian home. I had a bad impression of Air India until today. The ticket rates are competitive and sometimes cheaper than others.	1
NZ 281 25 Mar and NZ 282 on 2 Apr. Took the Premium Economy class flight to and from Auckland and I loved it. The seats are spacious and comfortable and it definitely felt much better than a red-eye flight on Economy. The complimentary bottle of water is a great touch because you do tend to get very dehydrated on a flight and having the bottle meant you didn't have to ask for a glass of water from the attendants every 10 minutes or so. The pillow provided is big and soft and very comfortable whether to hug or to prop against your back. The USB and power outlet though not uncommon anymore are still very much appreciated. I'm not sure if this feature exists in other airlines or if it's even a plausible concept but it may be great if a passenger can play his/her own media via a USB device eg. movies on a thumb drive or the sort. On the flight to Auckland there were just a handful of people in the Premium Economy cabin so service was impeccable and thoughtful right from the start. The attendants even came around mid-flight to make sure everything was okay for me. On my return it was a fully- booked flight so the attendants really had their work cut out for them. But they were still thoughtful and reasonably efficient. I would definitely fly with Air NZ again if I get the chance. Oh and did I mention that their safety video is really "epic"? It's the only safety video which I personally have ever given 110% attention to.	1
AKL-RAR then a week later RAR-LAX-LHR on 2x B767 and B777. Exit row seats on B767 and preferred seat (double) on B777.Only delay was RAR-LAX when we aborted take off due to a warning light soon fixed and we were on our way. Great service and IFE on all 3 legs.	1
Booked a trip Glasgow - Calgary and chose business option. Flight out went through Manchester there was not as much of a delay as we thought. Added about 90 mins to outward journey. Service wonderful food excellent. On time both ways.	1
IVC-CHC-AKL on ATR72 and A320.We checked in early due to heavy rain and the need to return a rental car and were at the agents suggestion put on earlier flights at no extra cost. Great customer service. Drink and snack on both flights.	1
NPE-AKL-CHC on ATR72 and A320. We should have travelled via Wellington to Christchurch we had checked in early having returned a rental car and were having a coffee when we were asked to go to check in desk the agent said weather was bad in Wellington and flights are being delayed did we wish to go via AKL arriving in CHC 2 hours earlier than planned we took up his offer. This was excellent unrequested customer service. Drink and snack on these short legs.	1
Gisborne-Christchurch NZ8652 and NZ0525. Wonderful experience travelling with two pre-school age children from Gisborne to Auckland and then on to Christchurch. The whole way was a pleasure with the pilots making our kids day by waving to them from the cockpit and the air hostess that let my daughter handout the sweets. I will point out the plane was running slightly late so it would have been understandable for them to be feeling slightly rushed and not accommodating but staff went above and beyond in all aspects.	1
My husband and I booked a flight with Transat in June for Barcelona from Montreal in their Club Class. The night before departure we were bumped down to economy class. I had reserved months in advance and only for Club. Because of our distress Air Transat booked us on Option Plus class and gave us 4 seats across for added comfort. They also refunded us half of each ticket plus gift certificates for future travel. The new refurbished flights were wonderful both in Options Plus and in Club with roomy seats luxuriously long seatbelts and pampering from the flight attendants. Champagne great food wine and steady stream of special snacks and the movies were all up to date. We arrived early. Our experience with Transat was fabulous.	1
Flew Air India from Mumbai to Hyderabad. Excellent leg room and seats are good. Ground and Cabin staff are very friendly and courteous. Food provided is delicious. Reached the destination on time.	1
Flew Paris CDG to Vancouver. Amazing experience, food was delicious, I did choose the risotto with mushrooms and I must say it was the best food I ever had served during a flight. They also served ice cream and water in the middle of the flight and another smaller meal before landing in Vancouver. Cabin crews were very friendly and attentive. The cabin was looking new and clean. Totally recommend flying with Air France, best European airline.	1
Had an enjoyable and comfortable flight from Toronto to Rome Fiumicino. Flight was on time and arrived in Rome 40 minutes early. Aircraft was clean staff were courteous and food was as good as airline food gets. Inflight (inseat) entertainment was better than most I have seen. Several updates from flight deck including pilot pointing out crossing the alps (stupendous views from the air). The only complaint I have was that the lights were not turned off during flight despite it being an overnight flight.	1
I flew with Air France from London to Bangkok via Paris Charles de Gaulle, I enjoyed both flights. Boarding was fast, flight attendants were attentive and friendly, good inflight entertainment and the food was quite nice compared to other airlines. I do travel very often and Air France is one of the best airline in Europe. Looking forward to fly with them again soon.	1
Flew from Queenstown NZ to MEL on NZ837 in economy. Hadn't flown on Air NZ for 10 years and we were keen to see if all the hype around their new "experience" was justified so we paid extra and got "the works". We departed on time and arrived 20 minutes early. The amount of legroom in the A320 was a positive revelation as was the extent and content of offerings provided on the in-flight entertainment system. The meal was fine without being exceptional and the crew was terrific. It really was a pleasure to fly. Thumbs up to Air NZ based on this flight!	1
My husband and I flew Air Transat last week from Montreal to Paris and I must say everything was perfect. Service was excellent the crew really did everything they could to please us. The entertainment system is brand new and has lots of movies TV shows games and music albums. The aircraft seemed to be brand new and was really nice. The food was good I mean airplane food is airplane food but it was really good compared to what I had on other airlines. Do not worry about the negative comments I'm a frequent flyer on lots of different airlines and I will be flying Air Transat more often because I have absolutely nothing negative to say.	1
Travelled with Air Transat Gatwick - Halifax and return on the 11th June and 25th June. On the outward flight we had a slight delay from Gatwick (nothing new) but made up time and arrived early after a very pleasant flight. On the return to Gatwick we took a few minutes early and arrived half an hour before our due landing time. I do not know if the cabin crew at Air Transat have been on a customer care course since I last traveled with Air Transat two years ago but there standard of care was first class on both flights. The only downside was the food but then airline food is a joke unless you pay top dollar for your flight. One new item on the return flight was the availability of Internet connection. Alas I could not get Google Chrome to download the app onto my Android tablet. It was my fault not being an IT person not Air Transats. All in all well done Air Transat.	1
We flew to Vancouver from Manchester in May with Air Transat. They were on time both ways the aircraft was clean and very bright the staff were great nothing was too much trouble. As airline food goes theirs was very good the movies were up to date all in all a great flight. We have used Transat a few times they really seem to have their act together well done.	1
I flew SYD to AKL on a 777-200U after flying from Saigon and it was a real pleasure to fly. The cabin was new and very comfortable. The IFE was great with a very responsive touch screen that was more like a tablet than the usual unresponsive screens. The seat was very good with plenty of space - I am a large man and usually my knees touch the back of the seat but not on this plane. I didn't try the food as I was not feeling that well but the crew have a relaxed but competent manner.	1
I travelled Works De-luxe Gold Coast to Auckland on 14/02/15 and returned on flight NZ937 on 21/02/15. I have done this trip on many occasions and have never been disappointed. Air New Zealand crew are so friendly and make you feel welcome. Due to ex tropical cyclone Marcia the return flight was diverted to Brisbane and we were then bussed to the Gold Coast airport. This was done efficiently and without fuss. I like the A320 for these short flights across the ditch. I only ever sit in seat 1A and have no complaints to make whatsoever.	1
Flew from London Gatwick to Vancouver and returned Calgary to Gatwick. We could not find fault at all with any part of the whole experience. Aircraft looked new Airbus 330's great inflight entertainment comfortable leather seats and plenty of leg room (I'm 6ft 1in). The airline staff are friendly and the meals were as good as any that you get in economy and better than most. We had some quite severe turbulence on the way back which the pilot warned us about and took time to explain it was all routine and no more than bumps in the road nice touch. I will use Air Transat as my first choice airline if they cover any of the routes I need to fly.	1
London to Paris return. No luggage and checked in online so did not experience checking at the airport. Outbound flight was a Boeing 787 so boarding took some time. Onboard seat comfort was very good as was legroom. This aircraft operates as a long haul product and I would have no issues in recommending it for a flight of this duration. Once at Paris deplaning took some time but otherwise fine. Return flight was on an A318. Online checkin again so very simple and straight forward. Not an AF issue but worthy of a mention is the lack of restaurants in CDG terminal 2E so something to bear in mind. Return flight left on time and again the seat was very comfortable and an enjoyable experience. Both flights offered a drink and quick snack which was great. Based on my experience I would choose them as a preference over BA and Lufthansa. Great flights all round.	1